Indian Perspectives on
Consciousness, Language and Self

This book examines the theory of consciousness developed by the school of
­Recognition, an Indian philosophical tradition that thrived around the tenth c.
CE in Kashmir, and argues that consciousness has a linguistic nature. It situates
the doctrines of the tradition within the broader Indian philosophical context and
establishes connections with the contemporary analytic debate.
The book focuses on Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta (tenth c. CE), two Hindu
intellectuals belonging to the school of Recognition, Pratyabhĳñā in Sanskrit.
It argues that these authors promoted ideas that bear a strong resemblance with
contemporary ‘higher-order theories’ of consciousness. In addition, the book
explores the relationship between the thinkers of the school of Recognition and
the thought of the grammarian and philosopher Bhartṛhari (fifth c. CE). The book
bridges a gap that still exists between scholars engaged with Western traditions
and Sanskrit specialists focused on textual materials. In doing so, the author uses
concepts from contemporary philosophy of mind to illustrate the Indian arguments
and an interdisciplinary approach with abundant reference to the original sources.
Offering fresh information to historians of Indian thought, the book will also
be of interest to academics working on Non-Western Philosophy, Comparative
Philosophy, Indian Philosophy, Religion, Hinduism, Tantric Studies, and South
Asian Studies.
Marco Ferrante is a specialist in Indian philosophy, with a special focus on
epistemology, philosophy of mind, and philosophy of language. He was Berggruen
Fellow in Comparative Philosophy at the University of Oxford, UK.

Routledge Hindu Studies Series
Series Editor: Gavin Flood
Oxford Centre for Hindu Studies

The Routledge Hindu Studies Series, in association with the Oxford Centre for
Hindu Studies, intends the publication of constructive Hindu theological, philosophical and ethical projects aimed at bringing Hindu traditions into dialogue
with contemporary trends in scholarship and contemporary society. The series
invites original, high quality, research level work on religion, culture and society of ­Hindus living in India and abroad. Proposals for annotated translations of
important primary sources and studies in the history of the Hindu religious traditions will also be considered.
Caitanya Vaiṣṇavism in Bengal
Social Impact and Historical Implications
Joseph T. O’Connell, edited by Rembert Lutjeharms
Vedic Practice, Ritual Studies and Jaimini’s Mīmāṃsāsūtras
Dharma and the Enjoined Subject
Samuel G. Ngaihte
The Legacy of Vaiṣṇavism in Colonial Bengal
Edited by Ferdinando Sardella and Lucian Wong
Salvation in Indian Philosophy
Perfection and Simplicity for Vaiśeṣika
Ionut Moise
The Goddess and The Sun in Indian Myth
Power, Preservation and Mirrored Māhātmyas in the Mārkaṇḍeya Purāṇa
Raj Balkaran
Indian Perspectives on Consciousness, Language and Self
The School of Recognition on Linguistics and Philosophy of Mind
Marco Ferrante
For more information about this series, please visit: www.routledge.com/
asianstudies/series/RHSS

Indian Perspectives on
Consciousness, Language
and Self

The School of Recognition on Linguistics
and Philosophy of Mind
Marco Ferrante

First published 2021
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
52 Vanderbilt Avenue, New York, NY 10017
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa
business
© 2021 Marco Ferrante
The right of Marco Ferrante to be identified as author of this work
has been asserted by him in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or
utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now
known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in
any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing
from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or
registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation
without intent to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this book has been requested
ISBN: 978-0-367-51794-6 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-003-05853-3 (ebk)
Typeset in Times New Roman
by Apex CoVantage, LLC

Contents

Acknowledgmentsvi
List of abbreviationsviii
Introduction

1

1

Historical and philosophical contexts

10

2

The Buddhist doctrine of non-self

26

3

The true nature of self-awareness

38

4

Self-awareness: Pratyabhijñā’s forerunners

50

5

A linguistic consciousness

63

6

Subjectivity and first-person stance

82

7

Self

91

Epilogue

109

Appendix: translations
Bibliography
Index

113
137
154

Acknowledgments

This book has been researched and written at two different institutions, the ­Austrian
Academy of Sciences in Vienna and Wolfson College, University of Oxford. I am
grateful to the Forderung Wissenchafts Funds (FWF) and the ­Berggruen Foundation for having financially supported me throughout the time I have worked on
this book and for allowing me to pursue my research interests in such inspirational
environments. In Vienna, my sincere gratitude goes to the three directors of the
Institute of Cultural and Intellectual History of Asia (IKGA), with whom I had
the privilege to work: the greatly missed Helmut Krasser, Vincent Eltschinger,
and Birgit Kellner. They have provided me with intellectual and practical support all through the almost five years I spent at the Institute, without the slightest
doubt one of the most constructive and happiest periods of my life. I am particularly grateful to Vincent for allowing me to join the IKGA as a young post-doc
researcher in one of his projects and to both him and Birgit for their support, guidance, and friendship that are still lively and ongoing.
My sincere gratitude goes also to Marion Rastelli and Isabelle Ratié for
having involved me in the FWF-funded project ‘A Śaiva Interpretation of the
Buddhist Theory of Exclusion’. The undertaking was originally meant to investigate Pratyabhijñā’s treatment of the Buddhist theory of apoha. Upon Isabelle’s
appointment as professor in Paris, I was allowed to step in and to turn the project
into an investigation of the relationship between Bhartṛhari and the Śaiva school.
The first seeds of this book were sown in the two years I spent working under
Marion’s supervision.
In Oxford, I am obliged to the Wolfson College for providing me a wonderful working environment and in particular to Richard Sorabji for his generous,
friendly support and for the fascinating discussions we had during our ‘philosophical lunches’. I am likewise filled with gratitude for Diwakar Acharya and his students at Oxford’s Faculty of Oriental Studies. Re-reading with them ­Utpaladeva’s
kārikās during Hilary Term 2019 has given me new insights into the text and
much food for thought.
Several friends and colleagues have helped me in one way or another over
the course of the years. I am particularly thankful to Elisa Freschi for backing and appreciating my work since the very beginning. I am also indebted to
Daniele Cuneo, Hugo David, Camillo Alessio Formigatti, Alessandro Graheli,

Acknowledgments vii
Patrick McAllister, Nina Mirnig, Cristina Pecchia, Gianni Pellegrini, Ernst Prets,
and Toshikazu Watanabe. Furthermore, I am grateful to Routledge’s anonymous
reviewer for the helpful suggestions and constructive criticism.
Last but absolutely not least, this book could not have been possible without
the encouragement and support of my teachers. I had the enormous privilege to be
first exposed to the doctrines of the Pratyabhijñā through the teaching of Raffaele
Torella, the world-leading expert on the topic. His dedication, the way in which
he compounds a highly specialist expertise with the capability to situate ideas well
beyond the original context, together with an innate ability to speak to the hearts
of his students, have been and will always remain a source of inspiration. I am
likewise greatly indebted to Vincenzo Vergiani. Many moons ago, he ignited in
me the passion for Bhartṛhari, and he has gently guided me through the process of
learning how to approach a difficult author. I still owe to him uncountable suggestions and insights on various aspects of my work.
In the end, this book came to combine the main research interests of my gūrūs.
In classical India, it was quite standard practice for a pupil to discuss the work of
his teacher(s) later in life. Due to unforeseen circumstances, I have not been able
to follow this (wise) approach. I hope nonetheless to have been able to achieve
at least something close to the high scholarly standard of Raffaele and Vincenzo.
On a more personal level, I will be forever thankful to Gino, Rosa, Gaetano,
Antonietta, Aldo, Maria, Roberto, Mimma, Sandro, Stefania, and Laura.
This book is dedicated to Mara, Federico, and Alessandro: “il mio universo
in voi”.

Abbreviations

ABh
ĪPK
ĪPKVṛ
ĪPV
ĪPVV
MA
MK
NS
NSB
PS
PSV
PV
PVin
ŚD
Sp.Kā
ŚSū
TS
TSP
VP
VPVṛ

Abhinavabharati of Abhinavagupta
Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikā of Utpaladeva
Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikā–Vṛtti of Utpaladeva
Īśvarapratyabhijñāvimarśinī of Abhinavagupta
Īśvara-pratyabhijñāvivṛtivimarśinī of Abhinavagupta
Madhyamakālaṃkāra of Śāntarakṣita
Mūlamadhyamakakārikā of Nāgārjuna
Nyāyasūtra of Gautama
Nyāyasūtrabhāṣya of Vātsyāyana
Pramāṇasamuccaya of Dignāga
Pramāṇasamuccaya–Vṛtti of Dignāga
Pramāṇavārttika of Dharmakīrti
Pramāṇaviniścaya of Dharmakīrti
Śivadṛṣṭi of Somānanda
Spandakārikas of Bhaṭṭa Kallaṭa
Śivasūtras of Vasugupta
Tattvasaṃgraha of Śāntarakṣita
Tattvasaṃgrahapañjikā of Kamalaśīla
Vākyapadīya of Bhartṛhari
Vākyapadīya–Vṛtti

Introduction

Consciousness is possibly the most decisive feature of mind and surely the most
puzzling. Its definition has long been a philosophical concern, and it is today
one of the most hotly discussed questions in philosophy of mind and cognitive
sciences. Whether conceived as an ability that is explainable in terms of brain
activity or as a peculiar capacity that is impossible to reduce to physical processes,
consciousness is still resisting a shared definition.
This book analyzes the way in which some classical Indian philosophers living
in the second half of the first millennium CE discussed the problem of consciousness and produced sophisticated and original insights on its nature.1 Its main
characters are authors who belonged to the so-called ‘School of the Recognition’
(Pratyabhijñā in Sanskrit), a Śaiva religious–philosophical tradition that flourished
in Kashmir between the ninth and the eleventh c. CE. The main exponents of the
school, Utpaladeva (925–975) and Abhinavagupta (975–1025), were primarily
prompted by apologetic reasons, that is, by the desire to defend the idea of personhood, of self, from the sharp criticism the Buddhist traditions had voiced against
the notion for centuries. With this basic purpose in mind, these authors developed an innovative discourse on consciousness that was arguably one of the most
refined in the premodern world. The main claim of this book is that ­Utpaladeva,
the leading theoretician of the school, proposed a theory of consciousness that
today would be categorized as a higher-order one. This means that he conceived
consciousness as the result of the activity of second-order mental states operating on first-order ones, which are those that directly derive from experience. In
addition, Utpaladeva regarded this activity as conceptual and language dependent, thus arriving at the conclusion the consciousness has ultimately a linguistic
nature. Finally, he also clearly claimed that mentality is an inherent component
of all things, thus endorsing a form of panpsychism. In drawing part of this picture, Utpaladeva was heavily influenced by the ideas of an earlier philosopher, the
grammarian Bhartṛhari (460–510). All this results in a complex and intellectually
engaging situation, in which the Pratyabhijñā thinkers formulated their theories
in opposition to those advanced by the Buddhists but with the crucial support of
notions that are traceable to the work of Bhartṛhari. Accordingly, to appraise the
originality of Utpaladeva’s philosophy of consciousness, it is absolutely vital to
keep in mind the contributions of the two other parties of our story.

2

Introduction

This book engages with the thought of these thinkers from three complementary points of view. Its primary purpose is explanatory. The doctrines we examine
are put forward in texts composed in technical Sanskrit, and their interpretation
is far from being completely settled. These texts are undoubtedly hard for the
modern reader, since they require the knowledge of a complex language and are
immersed in a cultural environment that is very distant from ours. It is for this
reason that I have tried as much as I could to assume a rather strict philosophical perspective, downplaying all the aspects that could make the affirmations of
these thinkers somehow even more baffling. Inevitably, such a course of action
has its own drawbacks. The aspect suffering most from this approach is probably
the religious inclination these philosophers had, an aspect that I have consciously
deemphasized but which remains crucial. Eventually, the esoteric circles to which
these intellectuals belonged aimed at revealing to initiates the pervasiveness and
omnipresence of Śiva, the tradition’s godhead. It is precisely the recognition of
Śiva’s ubiquity that gives to the school its name and frees human beings from
the fetters of transmigration. This reveals how the motives of the Pratyabhijñā’s
philosophers were absolutely typical of the Indian context, as their doctrines had
a strong soteriological drive and were primarily aimed at engendering liberation
(mokṣa). Still, this does not exclude that the school defended most of its ideas
through rational arguments that are worth to be taken seriously. Similar considerations apply to the other main figure discussed here, Bhartṛhari. This intellectual
was first and foremost a Sanskrit grammarian who has nevertheless given substantial contributions to the philosophical debate of his time and, as I hope to show,
not only in the domains in which his authority is normally acknowledged, that
is, semantics and philosophy of language. In his case, too, I have picked what is
relevant to my discussion without any aspiration for comprehensiveness.2
The reason behind the choice to focus on philosophical arguments is related to
the second perspective this book adopts, which is an argumentative and comparative one. In dealing with the doctrines of these intellectuals, I have made an effort
to engage with them critically, that is to say, to evaluate whether they are rationally
consistent or not. In doing so, I have tried to establish a connection with contemporary analytic philosophy whenever possible. This approach allows readers and
me to have a conceptual framework helpful to contextualize what these thinkers
were contending. Furthermore, it gives me the possibility to highlight a pressing
problem for those engaged with the study of non–Euro-American thought. The
problem at stake is that still too often, scholars working on Asian or African philosophies have to struggle with the notion that these traditions have produced just
religious mysticism, or second-rate speculation. To challenge this prejudice, this
book is also a work of comparative philosophy, an academic field that is gradually gaining recognition but whose credibility is somehow still open to question.
Tim Connolly has discussed some of the objections that can be raised against the
discipline (Connolly, 2015), and some of his remarks can be helpful to put in the
right perspective the motives and the methodology of this book. As I hinted earlier, the grossest attack one can mount to non–Euro-American thought is simply
to say that it does not meet the standard of real, i.e. Euro-American, philosophy.

Introduction 3
Even though this type of criticism is progressively losing ground, there are still
scholars voicing it.3 The “exclusion viewpoint”, as Connolly calls it, is weak and
easy to reject. The notion suffers, in the first place, from broad generalization, as
it presupposes that one can lump together under a single label all Euro-American
philosophical traditions. Moreover, it tends to be too narrow, as it defines philosophy by highlighting some features and minimizing others. The problem with this
approach is that whatever key feature one chooses to determine what philosophy
is, it would end up being an arbitrary one, and it will certainly leave some (crucial)
traditions out. To give an example, by choosing the role of evidence and logical argumentation as the hallmark of the discipline, many ancient Greek thinkers would be excluded. Conversely, if we believe that philosophers must have
ethical concerns up to the point of being able to provide models for good living,
much of the contemporary debate would not meet the standard. A more compelling objection against the validity of comparative philosophy comes from the
non–Euro-American traditions themselves. Connolly calls it the “one-sidedness
argument”. The argument rests on the idea that in drawing comparisons, one is
merely projecting one’s own categories and bias, most of the time Euro-American
ones, onto the cultures of other people. Brought to extremes, the ‘one-sidedness
argument’ seems to imply that comparative philosophy is just another form of
cultural colonization. A possible reply to this objection is that Euro-American
philosophy is far less a monolithic entity than a collection of many and often
conflicting strands of thought. In addition, one could point out that some of the
problems non–Euro-American philosophers undertake are actually the same their
Euro-American peers discuss in their works, and therefore they can legitimately
be enquired by using the same methods. Finally, it is worth noting that a comparative philosopher should not necessarily use a universalistic approach to point out
affinities between distinct philosophical traditions. One can also do comparative
philosophy with the purpose of highlighting differences.
A second type of criticism one can raise against the discipline regards indeed
the very notion of comparison. According to some, philosophy in itself comes
down to comparing ideas. If this was true, introducing a specific sub-field called
‘comparative philosophy’ would be redundant and useless. Following Connolly,
one could reply that comparing thinkers and notions belonging to one culture is
not the same as comparing between traditions that are radically alien. In the latter
case, fresh philosophical questions tend to emerge. A good example is precisely
the issue we are discussing right now. Examining whether a comparison between
mutually unfamiliar traditions is admissible—which is a philosophical issue in
itself—can emerge only after a comparative point of view is adopted.
If one in the end allows that comparing different philosophies is legitimate, it
remains to be seen how the comparison should actually proceed. Connolly identifies two main methods, the ‘descriptive’ and the ‘constructive’. By following a
descriptive approach, one is essentially using concepts of a given tradition, normally one’s own, to better understand and clarify those of another. Arguably, one
can question the legitimacy of this line of action, too, but it is difficult to deny
the fact that the experience we have of others is always mediated by our own

4

Introduction

cultural make-up and categories of thought. Nevertheless, one must be careful not
to fall into two traps. The first is the temptation to detect too many commonalities
between one’s own philosophical posture and the less familiar one. An inaccuracy
of this kind would strengthen the ‘one-sidedness’ argument and eventually lead to
universalism, the idea that all humankind thinks approximately in the same way,
notwithstanding historical circumstances. At the same time, one must also seek
not to take the opposite path, which consists in highlighting only differences and
in regarding the other traditions as completely alien to ours. This latter approach
easily falls into romanticism, that is to say, into an idealization of the other as
embodying principles and values that are entirely dissimilar from those we hold.
Connolly’s second approach to comparison, the constructive one, starts from
quite different premises. By adopting it, one focuses on a specific philosophical problem and explores the possibility that arguments of a different tradition
might turn out to be useful to solve the problem at hand. The main advantage
of this way of proceeding is that the thought of other cultures takes an active
role, and it is used to address contemporary concerns. Still, one may also question whether it is legitimate to apply the arguments of a philosophical tradition
to problems emerging in another, thus embracing the notion that there is some
sort of incommensurability between cultures. A discussion of this issue would
lead us very far from our point, but I generally agree with Connolly’s conclusion
that there is no incommensurability as such but just incommensurate aspects that
await to be commensurate.4 It seems to me that to reject the notion of comparison
between philosophies is tantamount to rejecting the notion of translation between
languages. Translating concepts from a language into another is not an easy task;
it must be done with care, and something gets inevitably lost in the process. But
I suspect that few would go as far as to contend that translations are useless or
even inherently impossible. The same happens in the case of philosophy, in which
certain conceptions can be compared with those of other cultures with the purpose
to acquire new information. Something is surely lost on the way, but something is
gained, too—at the very least, the awareness that the same problem can be tackled
from different but often equally legitimate standpoints.
***
Connolly’s overall considerations can be applied to the particular case of Indian
philosophy. According to a schematization introduced by Roy Perrett (2016,
pp. 16–20), scholars seemed to have investigated Indian thought by adopting four
main approaches, which he calls, partially following an earlier classification of
Amartya Sen (2005, pp. 140–142), the magisterial, the exoticist, the curatorial,
and the interlocutory.
The magisterial approach was taken by some early explorers of Indian thought,
in particular of those active during the period of British rule on India and sympathetic to the cultural agenda of the Raj. The magisterial approach explicitly
minimize the value of Indian culture and highlight its inferiority to the E
­ uropean
tradition, up to the point of voicing blatant racism. In Connolly’s model, this
approach would correspond to the ‘exclusion viewpoint’. But in a sense, it is even

Introduction 5
less commendable, since magisterial scholars often regarded Indian thought not
only as unable to meet the standard of genuine philosophy but also as a serious
menace to the intellectual health of Indian society.
Perrett’s second approach, the exoticist, is particularly evident in the works
of eighteenth-century German intellectuals, like Herder, Schelling, and
­Schopenhauer (though it is detectable also in the production of more recent interpreters like ­Radhakrishnan, Eliade, or Zimmer). Even if this perspective is generally appreciative of Indian culture, it is also dangerously misleading. The main
problem with the exoticist scholar is that she easily runs the risk of falling into
romanticism and ‘one-sidedness’. Romanticism is a detrimental attitude that is
well-known to specialists in Indian philosophy, since it has beset the discipline
for decades. It sets in when the strong argumentative and rational component of
South Asian culture is brushed aside, and India is pictured as the land incarnating values Europeans have never possessed or not possess any longer, such as
detachment, transcendence, spirituality, and anti-materialism. On the other hand,
one-sidedness develops when Indian thought is distorted and used, consciously or
not, as a means to reinforce one’s own ideas, as it is most evident in the case of
the philosophy of Schopenhauer.
If the magisterial and exoticist approaches are largely a thing of the past,5
­Perrett’s third approach, the curatorial one, is still used. It is the approach of the
so-called ‘classical Indology’, a discipline rooted in rigorous textual analysis and
therefore perfectly aware of the rationalist dimension of Indian philosophical literature. In the past two centuries, the curatorial approach has vastly increased
our knowledge of the history of Indian thought, but it has nonetheless one major
disadvantage. Normally, it is not concerned with the validity of the arguments the
indigenous traditions offer. If a notion is true, plausible, or plainly untenable, is
not a question for the curatorial scholar, who is usually interested in producing
the most reliable and philologically sound examination of the texts she is working
on. From a philosophical perspective, this is a limit. Categorizing the curatorial
approach according to Connolly’s nomenclature is difficult. In this case, several
factors might be at work: some scholars working on philosophical texts have an
extensive philological training but less familiarity with philosophical methods;
some others may consciously or unconsciously endorse a version of incommensurability, whereby it is sound to investigate Indian philosophy as a historical
phenomenon, but without taking a stand on whether the doctrines the indigenous
thinkers maintain are rationally acceptable or not.
The fourth approach—the one that Perrett favours and which I have tried to
apply in this book—is the interlocutory one, which is meant to be an improvement
over the curatorial. As the name betrays, this way of dealing with Indian thought
seeks to establish a dialogue between ‘us’ and ‘them’—between what they claim
and our own notions and cultural premises. This is a dialogue that is based on a
common ground, which is, I believe, a shared notion of truth. Even though the fact
is sometimes overlooked, most Indian thinkers were guided by a genuine desire to
establish how things really are, namely, to discover truth. That this truth can have,
as it happens often, a soteriological value is quite a different thing, which usually

6

Introduction

does not diminish the merit of the argumentations these thinkers offer. This book
is precisely an attempt to interloquire or, in other words, to establish a conversation with Indian philosophers on some specific problems, without for this reason
concealing the cultural make-up of its author.
If asked to plot Connolly’s considerations on the present book, I would answer
that I have mostly applied a descriptive method, insofar as I have used EuroAmerican categories to better understand what the Pratyabhijñā thinkers, the
­Buddhists and Bhartṛhari are claiming. Can I be accused of one-sidedness? I leave
the answer to the reader, but a couple of considerations are in order. In the first
place, I have largely made use of what Connolly believes to be the most effective
antidote against this kind of mistake, contextualization. All that I am going to
argue in the following is based on a careful analysis of textual passages, which are
abundantly quoted and translated. The interpretation I have given to this material
is obviously debatable, but it is in my opinion the most rational one can come up
with. In the second place, I think there are two pressing reasons why the works
I am going to examine require a descriptive approach, even at the cost of being
charged of one-sidedness. I hinted at both earlier. The first and most important is
that the interpretation of these texts is not always clear, also for specialists in the
field. I therefore believe that adopting a different perspective—in the present case,
that of contemporary philosophy of mind—can only enhance our understanding
of what these traditions were contending. The second reason is that we badly need
to show that Indian thinkers were actually doing philosophy. One way to do this
is to point out that their doctrines, though not necessarily similar to those of EuroAmerican traditions, comply with the same requirements—search for truth and
application of logical thinking—and are translatable into our conceptual language.
Apart from the explanatory purpose and the endorsement of a comparative perspective, this book aims at addressing a third and final aspect, which is more
strictly concerned with the history of Indian thought. I am talking about the influence Bhartṛhari had on the development of Pratyabhijñā’s ideas. The importance
of the grammarian for the Kashmiri school is not something I am discovering
here. Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta (as well as Somānanda, the founder of the
tradition) profusely quote the grammarian’s masterpiece, the Vākyapadīya, and
modern scholarship has already examined the issue.6 Nonetheless, this acknowledgement has often consisted in noting some general affinities between the two
parties, like the fact that both endorse a non-dualistic ontology or defend an
epistemology in which language occupies a critical role. Here I am favouring a
somewhat different approach to the question. In what follows, I will try to show
that Bhartṛhari’s contribution to the intellectual construction of the Pratyabhijñā
is limited to a very specific set of notions, those strictly related to the development of a higher-order theory of consciousness. This by no means minimizes
Bhartṛhari’s ascendancy over the Śaivas but rather the opposite: circumscribing
the grammarian’s impact to one of the most significant parts of the Pratyabhijñā’s
doctrine actually makes his influence even more significant.
As far as the structure of the book is concerned, the volume is arranged in
seven chapters followed by an appendix of translations. The first four chapters

Introduction 7
focus on the arguments the Śaivas present against their Buddhist rivals. Chapter 1
provides readers with preliminary information about the authors under analysis,
the Pratyabhijñā’s, the Buddhists—especially those belonging to the so-called
‘logical-epistemological school’, the Pramāṇavāda—and Bhartṛhari. This part
aims to establish a historical framework for the ensuing discussion, and it also
offers a basic summary of the epistemological and metaphysical positions of
these thinkers. Chapter 2 illustrates the main arguments the Buddhists advance
against the notion of self, taking into consideration both the standard criticism the
tradition has voiced against it over the centuries, and the particular shape these
arguments assume in the Śaiva literature. Chapter 3 is concerned with the way
the Pratyabhijñā pursues its main philosophical purpose, that is to say, how the
Śaivas counter the Buddhist criticism of selfhood described in the previous chapter. The Pratyabhijñā’s thinkers focus in particular on the mechanism of memory
and argue that a past event cannot be recollected without assuming the existence
of a permanent self that persists over time. The crucial argument the Śaivas offer
is that knowledge is a self-revealing event, and as such, it cannot be the content
of other knowledge episodes. This implies that the explanation of memory the
Buddhists defend, which is founded on the idea that a past event is recollected
through a chain of causally linked cognitions, is inadequate. Chapter 4 continues
to explore the notion of non-objectification of cognitions by presenting some possible precursors of the Pratyabhijñā’s treatment of the question. In particular, it is
concerned with the work of a Buddhist thinker, Śāntarakṣita (eighth c. CE), and
more thoroughly, with that of Bhartṛhari, arguably one of the first Indian thinkers
to advance this idea. Chapters 5 to 7 have a more philosophical slant and discuss the most innovatory aspects of the philosophy of the Recognition. Chapter 5
analyzes the main features of Utpaladeva’s theory of consciousness, it elucidates
its conceptual and linguistic nature, it shows how crucial was the influence of
Bhartṛhari on it, and it illustrates how the theory is positioned within the contemporary debate. Chapter 6 discusses how the Śaiva intellectuals were aware of the
fact that the private, phenomenal dimension of consciousness plays a crucial role
in defining what consciousness is. Chapter 7 examines some specific problems—
such as the disputable claim that in cognizing something one is always aware of
oneself as the subject of knowledge—and more in general what kind of self and
personhood the Pratyabhijñā thinkers have in mind when they talk about self or
personhood. In it I also argue that Utpaladeva’s philosophy is best understood as a
form of panpsychism. The appendix contains the translation of selected passages
from the works under consideration, passages that are relevant to the case I am
making. This serves two purposes: it is useful to Sanskritists, who can relate my
affirmations to the original texts, but it also provides the non-Sanskritists with a
first-hand experience of how Indian philosophical texts proceed.
This last remark leads me to the audience I had ideally in mind while writing
this book, an audience that is made up of both philosophers and specialists in
South Asian culture. As for the philosophers, I have to say clearly that it is not my
intention to contend that Pratyabhijñā’s or Bhartṛhari’s theories of consciousness
are unattackable, bulletproof interpretations, provided theories of that sort exist.

8

Introduction

Much more humbly, I hope I have been able to push the idea that these thinkers
had something important to say, among several other things, on the problem of
consciousness. As for the South Asian specialists, my ambition is a little greater.
I hope to have spelled more precisely what these thinkers were arguing for, to
have shown how and to what extent Bhartṛhari contributed to the Pratyabhijñā’s
doctrine, and to have made clear that the overall influence of this philosopher and
grammarian goes well beyond the realm of traditional grammar and semantics.

Notes
1 The periodization of the history of Indian philosophy is a problem in itself. I am using
the term ‘classical’ in a rather loose way, following the distinction recently proposed
by Roy Perrett (2016, p. 7). In the history of Indian thought, Perrett distinguishes an
ancient period (900 BCE–200 CE), a classical period (200 CE–1300 CE), a medieval
period (1300 CE–1800 CE), and a modern period (1800 CE–present). For an updated
and detailed discussion of the question, see Franco (2013). As for the term ‘Indian’, I am
using it as a synonym of South Asian, thus indicating all the modern countries of the
Subcontinent.
2 There are other valuable books on consciousness and mind in Indian philosophy.
Noteworthy are Timalsina (2009a), devoted to the Advaita Vedānta’s discussion of the
question, and Chakrabarti (1999), focused on the Nyāya school. Jonardon Ganeri has
discussed questions related to the topics examined in this book in several publications.
See in particular Ganeri (2007, 2012). I discuss the latter in some detail in Chapter 7.
Readers keen to know all the details of the philosophy of the Pratyabhijñā, including its
theological aspects, are strongly encouraged to consult Isabelle Ratié’s exhaustive monograph (Ratié, 2011a) or to directly immerse themselves in Utpaladeva’s work, which
has been masterfully edited, translated, and annotated by Raffaele Torella (Torella,
2002). For a general introduction to Bhartṛhari’s thought, Subramania Iyer’s old volume
is still very useful (Iyer, 1969). Similar considerations apply to the more philosophically
oriented work of Aklujkar (1970). Finally, one can look at a more recent monograph by
Jan Houben (1995a).
3 A recent book by Peter Park (2013) has convincingly put into question the notion that
philosophy was an exclusively Greek innovation. Even though the idea is nowadays
deeply entrenched, Park has shown that until the late eighteenth century, there was
no scholarly consensus about the origins of philosophy. Indeed, a good numbers of
­European intellectuals were persuaded that the emergence of philosophical thinking was
somehow connected to the wisdom of ‘eastern peoples’, like Egyptians, Jews, Persians,
and Indians. Park claims that the idea of a Greek origin of philosophy was developed
and promoted by a group of influential European thinkers, particularly Kant and his
followers. Park further contends that this stance was adopted as an ideological strategy
to corroborate the then widespread conception that Europeans were a racially superior
people. The operation was so successful that the notion that ancient Greeks ‘discovered’
philosophy, overcoming intellectual backwardness and mythical superstition, has been
repeated almost like a mantra in the past two centuries. Thinkers having nothing in
common such as Bertrand Russell and Martin Heidegger agreed on the Greek origins of
philosophy. The former wrote: “Philosophy begins with Thales” ­(Russell, 1945, p. 3).
The latter concurred with him: “The often heard expression ‘Western-European philosophy’ is, in truth, a tautology. Why? Because philosophy is Greek in its nature; Greek,
in this instance, means that in origin the nature of philosophy is of such a kind that it
first appropriated the Greek world, and only it, in order to unfold” (Heidegger, 1956,
pp. 29–31). Although professional philosophers are now much more cautious about this
sort of sweeping generalizations, the exclusionary attitude is still observable. See, for
instance, Pigliucci’s position described by Connolly (2015, p. 13).

Introduction 9
4 See Connolly (2015, p. 83). A powerful argument against incommensurability is the one
elaborated by Donald Davidson. Davidson argues against conceptual relativism, especially against Thomas Kuhn’s work on scientific paradigms (Kuhn, 1962). This latter
view posits the existence of ‘conceptual schemes’, which are different, incommensurable ways by which humans organize their experience. A crucial notion for the relativist
is that a conceptual scheme is expressed in a language that is untranslatable into that
of another conceptual scheme (“The failure of intertranslatability is a necessary condition for difference of conceptual schemes”, Davidson, 1974, p. 12). ­Davidson rejects all
this by showing that the idea of different conceptual schemes implies a basic paradox
(“different points of view make sense only if there is a common coordinate system on
which to plot them; yet the existence of a common system belies the claim of dramatic
incomparability”, Davidson, 1974, p. 6) and by attacking the notion of untranslatability. Although he discusses both complete and partial untranslatability, we can briefly
consider just the former, the latter’s rejection being based on it. His argument goes as
follows. A language and its associated conceptual scheme is something that stands in
a certain relation to experience. The point is to understand the nature of this relation.
Davidson examines two metaphors that are usually employed to describe the relation.
Conceptual schemes either organize something or they fit it. After some discussion, he
comes to the conclusion that both metaphors are just colorful ways to say that “something is an acceptable conceptual scheme or theory if it is true” (Davidson, 1974, p. 16).
The crux of the whole argument is to discern whether the truth of a sentence is independent from its translatability. For Davidson, it is not. To prove his point, he applies Tarski’s
theory of linguistic truth, according to which a sentence s of a language L is true if and
only if p. Here s stands for a description of s and p as s itself in English, or for a translation of s in another language. For example: ‘the snow is white’ (s) is true if and only
if ‘the snow is white’ (p). The example loses its triviality if s is a sentence of another
language, like: ‘la neve è bianca’, if and only if the ‘snow is white’. Davidson’s point is
that the notion of translatability is implicit in that of truth. We can tell that a sequence
of sounds is language only because we are able to interpret it in our own tongue. This
entails that language is by nature open to interpretation and translatable; otherwise it
does would not possess ‘language-hood’. On this construal, Davidson concludes that
both notions of untranslatability and conceptual scheme make little sense.
5 Actually, whether the exoticist approach is definitely over is unsure. Although no serious
scholar would today attribute to Indian thought the traits of idealism, spirituality, and
anti-rationalism so common in the past, the notion still lingers in the lay perception of
the culture of South Asia.
6 See, for instance, the discussions in Iyer (1969), Dwivedi (1991), Filliozat (1994),
Torella (2002, 2008), Rastogi (2009), and Vergiani (2016).

1

Historical and philosophical
contexts

The school of Recognition
The expressions pratyabhijñā, pratyabhijñādarśana, pratyabhijñā system,
‘school of Recognition’, etc., all indicate the philosophical, theological, and ritual theories of a group of authors and spiritual teachers who lived and taught in
­Kashmir between the tenth and the eleventh centuries CE. These authors belonged
to the same intellectual lineage—often in a relationship of master and disciple—
and were probably initiated to the same ritualistic tradition, a variety of Śaiva
Tantrism. The Pratyabhijñā works are part of that prolific and diverse religious
and intellectual movement—sometimes labelled post-scriptural exegesis1—which
followed the emergence and the propagation throughout the Indian subcontinent
of a specific type of texts known as Tantras. These texts, which presumably did
not appear before 400 CE, presented themselves as depository of a peculiar soteriological wisdom that differed both in character and aims from the one revealed in
the two classes into which the authoritative texts of the Vedic tradition are usually
divided, the so-called śruti and smṛti (Sanderson, 1988, pp. 660–661). By applying a form of hyper-ritualism, the tantric adept, or tāntrika, aspires to achieve
various spiritual goals, spanning from the release (mokṣa) from the cycle of births
to the acquisition of supernatural powers (siddhis). Furthermore, by complying
to the precepts of a spiritual tradition that entails various degrees of esotericism,
transgressive behaviours, and a strict liaison with a guru, the tāntrika is able to
achieve her religious purposes more quickly than her Vedic counterpart.2 However, the Tantras rarely go as far as to negate the validity of the Vedic orthodox
systems; much more often, they simply regard them as provisional, imperfect,
and hierarchically inferior ways to cope with the knowledge of ultimate things.3
In early medieval South Asia, tantric literature was widespread and covered the
whole spectrum of Indian religions, so that a vast body of Śaiva, Śākta, Vaiśṇava,
Buddhist, and to a lesser extent, Jaina Tantras has been preserved.
Following a classification introduced by Alexis Sanderson (Sanderson, 1988,
pp. 667–679), Śaiva Tantras can be divided into two main groups. The first
one includes the 28 tantras that form the scriptural basis of a tradition known
as Śaiva-Siddhānta. Its adherents—who were openly concerned with the civic
domain of religion—embraced a dualistic ontology and adopted rituals and social

Historical and philosophical contexts 11
behaviours which were largely acceptable to the standard Vedic practitioners
(Sanderson, 2009a, p. 118). The second group comprises a much more diverse
collection of texts characterized by the veneration of terrific forms of Śiva (particularly Bhairava) and/or of his female counterpart.4 These texts generally backed
a non-dualistic ontology and constituted the scriptural authority of a number of
traditions which were far less involved in the public sphere of religion, and whose
rituals often displayed transgressive and antinomic behaviours. However, following again a recurrent hermeneutical scheme, the non-Saiddhāntika traditions
did not reject the teachings of the Siddhānta but regarded them as preliminary to
their own.
The religious setting of medieval Kashmir was extremely diversified, and its
culture was the result of the interaction of different traditions. The first major
religion to set foot in the valley was probably Buddhism, but Brahmanism with all
its tantric varieties followed rather soon.5 There are reasons to believe that by the
end of the ninth century the Śaiva-Siddhānta and most of the non-Saiddhāntika
schools were active. By this period, they started to interact with one another, thus
paving the way for that post-scriptural phase that is the main concern of this book.
A first watershed moment occurred in the second half of the ninth c. when two
crucial works were composed, the Śivasūtras of Vasugupta and the Spandakārikās
of Bhaṭṭa Kallaṭa, a disciple of the former (hereafter ŚSū and SpKā); as Sanderson
puts it, they were “the first attempt from the Śākta—Śaiva domain to present a
non-dualistic metaphysics and a gnostic soteriology in opposition to the dualistic
and ritualistic exegesis of the Saiddhāntika Śaiva scriptures” (Sanderson, 2007,
p. 426). Even if these two works were far from being a full-fledged exposition
of Śaiva non-dualistic philosophy—they had rather different purposes and were
composed in a style that did not allow too much elaboration—they nevertheless
quickly gained an aura of authoritativeness and became an object of quasi-sacred
veneration for later authors.
The tendency towards non-sectarian debate became finally explicit with the
establishment of the school we are directly concerned with. The Pratyabhijñā took
shape thanks to the teaching of a series of gurus whose lives covered a little more
than a century, roughly from the beginning of the tenth c. to well into the eleventh c. The first exponent of this lineage is Somānanda, a scholar and spiritual
teacher whose date has been assigned to 900–950 CE (Sanderson, 2007, p. 411).
Somānanda was the first to attempt to organize and philosophically explicate the
teachings of Śaiva non-dualism, a task he carried out in the Śivadṛṣṭi (ŚD), in
all likehood his only work.6 He was a brahmin and was probably involved in the
court of the kings of Kashmir (Nemec, 2011, p. 20). The ŚD’s most striking peculiarity is the use of a mixed register, which blends mystical intuitions on the nature
of the ultimate reality with philosophical analysis and criticism of opposite views.
This has prompted John Nemec to argue that the work “was probably intended for
a philosophically oriented audience, but one that was primarily made up of tantric
initiates, or for potential initiates who would be predisposed to the scriptural tone
and high, if mixed, register of the work” (Nemec, 2011, p. 20).

12

Historical and philosophical contexts

A radical shift in the purposes and the positioning of the Pratyabhijñā came
with Somānanda’s disciple, Utpaladeva (925–975), who was undoubtedly the
great innovator of the school and its central figure; to his writings we owe the
name of the tradition itself and an in-depth exposition of its basic tenets. Most
important was Utpaladeva, who put the Pratyabhijñā into the wider inter-religious
debate that was at the heart of the classical phase of Indian philosophy. Apart
from subtler theoretical differences, the main rift between Somānanda’s ŚD and
his pupil’s works was the latter’s being open to the influence of a number of traditions, including Buddhist Pramāṇavāda, Bhartṛhari, Nyāya-Vaiśeṣika, Mīmāṃsā,
Sāṃkhya, etc. Scholars have proposed different reasons for this shift, indeed all
plausible. Raffaele Torella has hypothesized that the purpose of the school was “to
offer itself implicitly as an alternative to the dominant Śaiva Siddhānta, or at least
to establish itself as a non-extraneous element” (Torella, 2002, p. xiii). Sanderson,
on the other hand, has stressed that the decision derived “from the nature of the
commentators’ social milieu, which is one of Śaiva Brahmins eager to consolidate
their religion on the level of high culture”.7 The result is the development of what
David Gordon White has defined High Hindu Tantra, an intellectual construction stemming from the necessity of an “internalization, an aestheticization, and
a semanticization of Kaula [i.e. antinomic and extreme] practice”. That is to say,
“the transformation ‘from a kind of doing to a kind of knowing,’ a system of
‘overcoding’ that has permitted householder practitioners to have it both ways
and lead conventional lives while experimenting in secret with Tantric identities” (White, 2003, pp. 219–220). Whatever the reason, Johannes Bronkhorst is
certainly right in pointing out that this opening to others implied a radical influence of the adversary tenets on the Pratyabhijñā’s ones. And, implicitly, this also
proves how remarkable was the capacity of attraction of the Indian rationalist
tradition: in the end, even Tantric intellectuals were eventually forced to prove
the validity of their theses by recurring to rational scrutiny (Bronkhorst, 1996a).
Utpaladeva’s main theoretical accomplishment are the Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikā,
the ‘Stanzas of the Recognition of the Lord’ (ĪPK). At the same time,8 he also composed a first brief explanation of the stanzas, known as Vṛtti; later in life (Torella,
2014, p. 116) he analyzed the complex kārikā-vṛtti, in a further work, the Vivṛti or
Ṭīkā, a more comprehensive and detailed commentary which is almost totally lost.9
This is certainly a severe blow for the study of the Pratyabhijñā. By judging on the
basis of the few fragments preserved, there is little doubt that the Vivṛti must have
constituted the very heart of the system and had a great impact on the achievements of Utpaladeva’s most brilliant and influential successor, Abhinavagupta.
After these works, Utpaladeva composed three specific treatises, meant to analyze
in greater detail themes he had already touched on in the ĪPK: the Īśvarasiddhi,
devoted to the defend the notion of God, a task which he carried out by adopting a Naiyāyika point of view; the Ajaḍapramātṛsiddhi, which aims at proving
the existence of a conscious knowing subject; and finally, the Saṃbandhasiddhi,
concerned with the defence of the metaphysical notion of ‘relation’ from the Buddhist criticism. To these theoretical writings Utpaladeva added two other works: a
commentary on the ŚD, which is only partially preserved, and a popular collection

Historical and philosophical contexts 13
of mystical hymns, the Śivastotrāvalī, which the author composed throughout his
life and which was collected by his pupils after his death.
Among Utpaladeva’s followers, the most significant is certainly ­Abhinavagupta
(975–1025), who was made acquainted with the Pratyabhijñā tradition by a
teacher known as Lakṣmaṇagupta (950–1000). Lakṣmaṇagupta did not leave any
work behind, but he is traditionally regarded as a direct disciple of ­Utpaladeva.
Abhinavagupta was truly one of the great intellectuals of India, a polymath who
gave outstanding contributions to many fields, from metaphysics to aesthetics and
theology. From a philosophical and religious standpoint, his crucial achievement
was the systematization of the teachings of the Pratyabhijñā, which he employed
as a theoretical device to harmonize the ideas and the practices of the many
Tantric currents present in the Kashmir of his time. He also further expanded
the boundaries of the tradition by making the interconnection with other schools
much more explicit and edulcorated the power of antinomic rituals with the purpose to create a synthesis palatable to a wider audience. Whether Abhinavagupta
succeeded in the process of harmonization of the various strands of the so-called
Kashmir Śaivism, in terms of both ritual practices and theoretical background,
is questionable,10 but it is out of question that after his intervention many typical themes of the Pratyabhijñā set foot in traditions that were far from the original one, sometimes even geographically. Later in life (Gnoli, 1999, p. lxxxi),
Abhinavagupta devoted to the Pratyabhijñā his two main philosophical treatises,
both of them in the shape of commentaries on Utpaladeva’s works. Probably also
relying on an already developed oral analysis of the ĪPK (Torella, 2002, p. xlii),
Abhinavagupta composed a first commentary on Utpaladeva’s kārikās named
Īśvarapratyabhijñāvimarśinī (ĪPV), later followed by a longer work titled Īśvarapratyabhijñāvivṛtivimarśinī (ĪPVV), in which he commented the lost Vivṛti. As
far the spreading of the Pratyabhijñā doctrines is concerned, there is no doubt that
Abhinavagupta played a role that is difficult to overstate. The ĪPV in particular has
long been regarded as the literary and philosophical masterpiece of the school,11
the work in which the ideas advanced in the original stanzas are expanded and
contextualized by abundant references to views of other schools, which is something that in Utpaladeva’s preserved works is often missing. Nevertheless, our
appreciation of the originality of Abhinavagupta as a theoretical thinker—at least
as a Pratyabhijñā thinker—is inevitably affected by the lack of ­Utpaladeva’s
Vivṛti. According to a tradition he himself fostered,12 Utpaladeva composed his
three main works with different aims and readers in mind. The stanzas were
addressed to those who have already reached the highest level in the philosophical and religious path. For these persons, even the relatively concise form of the
kārikās is enough to fully realize the message of the school. But those who are, so
to speak, in the middle of the path, they must read and meditate the stanzas with
the aid of the short explanations provided by the Vṛtti, thus eliminating even the
slightest influence of alien (and erroneous) doctrines. At the lowest level, those
who are still at the mercy of false opinions should approach the Pratyabhijñā’s
teaching through the Vivṛti, the work in which all details are carefully explained
and fallacious notions refuted. If this scheme is true—and there is no reason to

14

Historical and philosophical contexts

doubt it—it is obvious that Utpaladeva’s most interesting work, at least from the
point of view of a historian of ideas, is the longest one, the Vivṛti, precisely the one
that is missing. This inevitably casts a shadow on Abhinavagupta’s centrality as
a theoretician of the Pratyabhijñā: as long as the Vivṛti remains mostly unknown,
there is no way to determinate whether what is contained in Abhinavagupta’s
commentaries is the result of original thinking or rather a learned restatement
of what ­Utpaladeva has put forth beforehand. Since the publication of his edition and translation of the ĪPK with the Vṛtti, Torella has frequently questioned
the originality of Abhinavagupta’s role in building the theoretical edifice of the
Pratyabhijñā. He wrote: “Abh.’s contribution to the Pratyabhijñā—in the light
of what can be inferred from the hints at and the quotations of the ṭīkā [i.e. the
Vivṛti] contained in the ĪPVV and other passages of the ṭīkā which have been
handed down to us in various ways—appears far less original than is generally
thought . . . it seems clear that the majority of the themes and subjects that Abh.
touches on find their direct correspondence—or at least their starting point—in
Utp.’s ṭīkā” (Torella, 2002, p. xliii). The discovery and publication of fragments of
the Vivṛti and hence the possibility to access a little more substantial material did
not induce Torella to change his mind; rather, it was the opposite. As recently as
2014, he concludes an article dedicated to the lost Vivṛti by remarking that “now
that it is possible to look, however partially, into the Vivṛti, . . . we are no longer
allowed to consider Utpaladeva a mere predecessor of Abhinavagupta and that the
latter is the great master of the Pratyabhijñā, but we must rather take Utpaladeva,
particularly with his Īśvarapratyabhijñā–Vivṛti, as the real centre of gravity of the
system, and Abhinavagupta mainly as his brilliant commentator” (Torella, 2014,
p. 125). That said, it is also worth to keep in mind that the search for originality
was not an issue for the Pratyabhijñā philosophers (Pandey, 1963, p. 166), neither
it was in the broader context of Indian culture. However, it remains a concern for
modern interpreters aiming at reconstructing history of ideas. Whether certain
concepts were introduced by Abhinavagupta or were already present in Utpaladeva’s formulation remains a historically open question, which is relevant also
to some of the issues we are going to deal with in the following.
Before proceeding further, it is useful to have a closer look at the works that
are the object of our analysis. Utpaladeva’s ĪPK are arranged into four main chapters (adhikāra), each one with a title that is meant to give an idea of its content.
The first two deal more explicitly with philosophical arguments and are largely
devoted to investigating the nature of knowledge (jñānādhikāra) and action
(kriyādhikāra). The remaining two, the āgamādhikāra (‘Chapter on Traditional
Teachings’) and the tattvasaṃgrahādhikāra (‘Chapter on the Summary of Principles’), are instead more concerned with outlining a coherent theological picture.
Each chapter (except for the last one) is further divided into sections (āhnika,
possibly meant to be studied in one day), which usually deal with a circumscribed part of the argument. To each āhnika Abhinavagupta assigns a short title
in the ĪPV. As for the positioning of the work within the tradition, Utpaladeva is
explicit in rooting his kārikā in the intellectual framework provided by the ŚD of
Somānanda, a text to which he pays homage at the end of his own treatise (ĪPK

Historical and philosophical contexts 15
4.16). Totally complying with the stereotypical humbleness that dictated the relationship between master and disciple in classical India, Utpaladeva presents his
work as a simple restatement of the ‘new path’ (abhinavo mārgaḥ) the honourable
Somānanda had discovered and expounded. Apart from this rather conventional
display of modesty, the difference between Utpaladeva’s purposes and those of his
master is revealed by a close reading of the Vṛtti commenting on the nature of this
“new path”: “This new, straightforward path, has been put forward in the treatise
named Śivadṛṣṭi, composed by the honourable Somānanda, who had a direct experience of the form of the blessed Parameśvara. Having endowed this path with a
logical justification, I made it enter the hearts of men”.13 According to the passage, Somānanda had “a direct experience of the blessed form of Śiva”, which he
revealed in the ŚD. Conversely, Utpaladeva’s motives are apparently more down
to earth, for he simply aims at propagating Somānanda’s path by, literally, making
it “to enter the hearts of men”. The point is how to accomplish that purpose and
to understand whose hearts are in question. As Utpaladeva explicitly claims in the
Vṛtti, the only possible way to disseminate the Śaiva truths is by use of logical
arguments; the intention is to persuade those cultivated and well-read people who,
although divided by religious breaches, recognize the value of rational arguments.
The centrality of this apparently hasty remark, put the at the very end of the ĪPK,
is hard to overstate and epitomizes the tone of the entire work. In Utpaladeva’s
own words, whilst the ŚD testifies to a direct experience of truth, the task of the
ĪPK is to firmly ground this experience in reason and to defend it from external
criticism. The quasi clairvoyant nature of Somānanda’s insights is also reinforced
by Utpaladeva’s use of the culturally loaded word sākṣātkṛta, by which he confers to his master an immediacy of perception that is usually reserved to divine
or semi-divine beings.14 In contrast, Utpaladeva chooses for himself the humble
function of a mere exposer. Now all this must be taken with a pinch of salt, since
rhetoric is playing a part in Utpaladeva’s affirmations. For instance, even if in the
ŚD theological and religious considerations seem to prevail, the work is not at all
a purely mystic one, but it also passionately engages with divergent opinions.15
Likewise, although the overall character of the ĪPK is undoubtedly argumentative
and deeply embedded in the philosophical atmosphere of its time, in it theological
issues are not entirely passed over.
Another, perhaps even more explicit suggestion that Utpaladeva was more concerned with the philosophical implications of the Śaiva doctrine and less with its
theological side can be gleaned at the opposite end of the work, namely at the very
beginning, where the author says: “Having somehow obtained the state of servant of Maheśvara and wishing to help the whole of mankind, I am going to give a
rational justification of the recognition of the Lord, which causes the obtainment
of all success”.16 Utpaladeva again makes it clear that his main duty is to prove the
validity of the Pratyabhijñā doctrine on rational grounds. Yet quite interestingly,
he remains vague on how he actually came to gain this doctrine. He limits himself
to say that he has ‘somehow’ obtained the status of slavery to Śiva, with a vagueness that is only partially mitigated by the commentary, in which he adds that such
a desirable condition is simply due to the grace of the Lord.17 This looks like a

16

Historical and philosophical contexts

further indication that in the composition of the work, rational argumentation and
apologetics prevail over the phenomenological description of the highest reality,
although the demonstration of the latter surely remains the ultimate purpose of the
whole Pratyabhijñā’s enterprise.
After having expounded his program, Utpaladeva’s first preoccupation is to
logically justify the existence of the treatise itself. This is a quite typical move in
Indian technical literature. An author is allowed to proceed to the actual content
of his work only after showing that all that he is going to say is absolutely necessary. Utpaladeva develops his argument in the very first section of the ‘Chapter on
Knowledge’ by setting out with an objection: if the Lord is eternally established
(ādisiddha) as agent and knower, how can one epistemologically determine his
existence or non-existence? Here one should read a bit between the lines and
keep in mind that Śiva corresponds to consciousness and self. The question would
then become if everyone is perennially acquainted with their own self as the subject of action and knowledge, how can one epistemologically determine the self’s
existence or non-existence? Utpaladeva’s answer is that, even if self is always
perceived by everybody (dṛṣṭe ‘pi), its true nature (hence of consciousness and
Śīva) is nonetheless not discerned (anupalakṣite). This happens because of delusion, a false disposition that precludes people from true knowledge. The purpose
of the treatise is thus to establish how things really are by recognizing the self’s
essential nature. It is also worth appreciating the epistemological finesse of the
term ‘recognition’. In fact, what is at stake is not to determine the self (or Śiva) by
means of a new cognition. That would be a purposeless effort, for the self is ever
established. The point is rather to dispel delusion, to overcome the idea that there
is something different from consciousness, and to recognize that the entire reality
is indeed a manifestation of consciousness itself. This is, in a nutshell, the task of
the Pratyabhijñā’s philosophers.
Put in this way, Utpaladeva’s agenda may look like one of the many monistic
philosophies Indian culture has produced. Yet much of Pratyabhijña’s originality lies in how its thinkers picked up different ideas and blended them to build
a coherent picture. A picture that is, however, unacceptable to the school’s main
opponents, the Buddhists.

The main adversaries: the Pramāṇavāda school of Buddhism
In the same article quoted earlier, Torella summarizes the philosophical program
of the Pratyabhijñā as follows: “The philosophy of the Pratyabhijñā is built upon
two main cornerstones, both of them due to Utpaladeva: the above mentioned attitude to the Buddhist pramāṇa philosophers, made of a subtle interplay of attraction and rejection, and the acceptance of the legacy of Bhartṛhari, which had been
so openly despised by Utpaladeva’s guru Somānanda” (Torella, 2014, p. 125).
Utpaladeva’s philosophical program is carried out with a specific intention in
mind, as the Śaiva aims at showing that which is usually regarded as the most
important teaching the Buddha put forth, non-self (anātman), is false. The version
of Buddhist philosophy which is mostly discussed in the Pratyabhijñā works is the
one elaborated by the so-called logical—epistemological school, often indicated

Historical and philosophical contexts 17
with the Sanskrit term Pramāṇavāda (literally the “School of the right means of
knowledge”). This tradition emerged in the early sixth c. CE, thanks to the work
Dignāga,18 whose ideas were later refined and expanded by Dharmakīrti (sixth or
seventh c. CE),19 one of the most outstanding figures of South Asian intellectual
history. The school combines the soteriological emphasis of earlier Mahāyānic
traditions with an extremely sophisticated epistemological discourse, and it was
often engaged in polemics with Brahmanical schools, particularly Nyāya and
Mīmāṃsā.20
Many arguments developed by the Pramāṇavāda are discussed throughout this
book; nevertheless, it is useful to have a preliminary look at the main positions of
the school on ontology and epistemology. The Pramāṇavādins claim that reality
is reducible to two basic ontological categories, the particular and the universal. One cognizes these two aspects through just two different means (pramāṇas)
of acquiring knowledge (pramā), respectively, direct perception (pratyakṣa) and
inference (anumāna). Brahmanical schools accepted other pramāṇas, but the
Buddhists dismiss them as particular cases of inference. Ontologically speaking, the bare particular, or svalakṣaṇa, is all that truly exists. It is a fleeting
entity characterized by causal efficiency (arthakriyā), insofar as it appears for
an instant—the time necessary to be generated by and generate an effect—and
then disappears. Given the right conditions, a svalakṣana is able to produce a
reliable, direct perception of itself, which is non-conceptual and immediate. But,
crucially, the svalakṣana is also capable to yield an altogether different kind of
awareness, which Dharmakīrti calls ekapratyavamarśa (‘unitary judgement’) or
niścaya (‘determinate cognition’). This second type of cognition arises indirectly.
Under appropriate conditions, the perceptual awareness of the svalakṣana activates in the mind a latent tendency (vāsanā), which is the result of successful
applications of the determinate cognition in question that have occurred earlier in
similar contexts. This determinate cognition is a universal, it is grasped linguistically, and it is the content of the only other pramāṇa the Buddhist epistemologists
accept, inference. Whatever comes under this designation has therefore a negative connotation; although useful for practical concerns, it is ultimately a mental
fabrication (vikalpa) that is only indirectly linked to the real svalakṣana. This
entails an ontological view whereby reality is conceived as made up of innumerable, instantaneous, and causally active particulars, which are held together by an
infinite chain of cause–effect relations. Any objectification of this fleeting stream
(be it in terms of self, substance, universal, relation, and so on) is seen as an error
whose consequences transcend the philosophical dimension and end up affecting
the path to deliverance.
At its core, the Pratyabhijñā’s struggle in favour of the existence of a self is an
effort to dismantle the epistemological and ontological picture we have just outlined. But different from earlier Brahmanical philosophies, who fought the Buddhist ideas straightforwardly, Pratyabhijñā’s disposition towards Buddhist logic
and epistemology is subtler. Although Utpaladeva’s final theses obviously diverge
from those of the Pramāṇavādins, there are nevertheless points of contact between
the two sides. In general, one gets the feeling that the Śaivas had an attitude of
acceptance of some basic technicalities of Buddhist epistemology—like the

18

Historical and philosophical contexts

self-revealing nature of knowledge or the idea that cognitions cannot be the object
of other cognitions (see also the discussion in Chakrabarti, 2012) but with the
crucial stipulation that these technicalities are correctly understood only within
Pratyabhijña’s own framework, which requires the existence of a permanent self
and, ultimately, of an all-pervading consciousness. A further point of similarity
in the complex relationship between the two parties concerns certain ontological
outcomes of the Pramāṇavāda, especially those that seem to slide into an idealistic, ‘only-consciousness’ (cittamātra) perspective.21 According to this stance, the
final result of philosophical analysis consists in realizing that objects of cognitions
are confined to the mind and, accordingly, that there is no compelling reason to
postulate the existence of external objects.22
Overall, Utpaladeva’s strategy of refuting the Buddhist doctrines is based on
the belief that it is philosophically possible to reconcile the supposed persistence
of a unitary metaphysical principle with the multiplicity that characterizes the
phenomena. Whether this is a viable position is the problem that besets any form
of non-dualism, hence an issue several Indian thinkers have faced well before
Pratyabhijñā’s time. In retrospect,23 the most influential answer to the question is
perhaps that of Śaṅkara’s Advaita Vedānta, according to which true reality consists in a unitary and all-embracing principle the tradition calls Brahman. In this
perspective, ordinary phenomena are seen as illusory manifestations of Brahman,
and the fact that they are perceived as different from the unitary principle depends
only on an epistemic error caused by ignorance. Once true knowledge sets in, the
illusory world slips away, and what remains is a state of being in which just the
single, unitary reality persists. All this, of course, entails that between world and
Brahman, there is a total otherness, so Advaitins’ strategy to justify non-dualism
eventually leads to the conclusion that phenomena are unreal.24 The Pratyabhijñā
is following an altogether different path. For the Śaivas, the manifested phenomena and the unitary principle (in their case, the all-encompassing consciousness of
Śiva) are regarded as essentially the same. If difference is experienced, the cause
is again an epistemic mistake that ultimately depends on the will of the unitary
principle itself. In the history of Indian philosophy, this road was not taken by
the Pratyabhijñā only. There are reasons to believe that certain, pre-Śaṅkarian
strands of Advaita Vedānta were more cautious in negating the reality of phenomenal experience, but unfortunately, the literary traces those traditions left are
scant at the most.25 In the Brahmanical milieu, there is only one thinker whose
work is adequately preserved and who seems to have explored the possibility of
a ‘dynamic’ version of non-dualism in which the reality of ordinary experience is
retained. This thinker is Bhartṛhari, an author the Pratyabhijñā philosophers knew
very well.

The main ally: Bhartṛhari and his legacy within the
Pratyabhijñā
In the article quoted in the previous section, Torella mentions a second ‘cornerstone’ on which Pratyabhijñā’s thought is built, which is the legacy of Bhartṛhari

Historical and philosophical contexts 19
(460–510 CE). The author in question is another looming figure in the intellectual
history of South Asia. First and foremost a Sanskrit grammarian—no doubt the
most influential to have lived in the common era—he was responsible for broadening the interests of traditional grammar (vyākaraṇa) by exploring a variety of
concerns that was unknown to his predecessors. Not that in premodern India, the
analysis of language was unheard of; rather the opposite. Bhartṛhari was rooted
in a very ancient tradition of grammatical investigation that reaches back into the
work of Pāṇini (possibly fourth c. BCE)—the first known intellectual to analyze
and systematize Sanskrit—whose extant work, the Āṣṭādhyāyī, remains a mainstay in the history of human linguistics. Pāṇini’s mainly morphological analysis
of Sanskrit was carried on in the third c. BCE by Kātyāyana, who glossed the
Āṣṭādhyāyī with his vārttikas, and by Patañjali, the author of a lengthy and systematic commentary known as Mahābhāṣya (second c. BCE), which incorporates
also Kātyāyana’s glosses. These three authors are often referred by later tradition
as the ‘three sages’ of grammar (munitraya), and after a few centuries, they gained
such an authority in the field that their figures ended up being almost divinized
(Deshpande, 1993). Bhartṛhari is the fourth character in this lineage, even if the
gap between him and his closer predecessor, Patañjali, is no doubt significant.
Bhartṛhari’s date was established in the 1960s by Erich Frauwallner (Frauwallner,
1961, pp. 129–135), who worked on a number of citations of Bhartṛhari he was
able to trace in Buddhist literature. Frauwallner’s main clue for dating the grammarian were the reasonably established dates of two authors—Vasubandhu, the
Buddhist author of the Abhidharmakośa, who is thought to have lived between
400 and 480 CE, and Dharmapāla, who was probably active between 530 and 561.
Frauwallner first established the date of Dignāga. Since the latter explicitly mentions Vasubandhu and one of his works is commented by Dharmapāla, he must
necessarily have lived between the two. Moreover, Dignāga quotes Bhartṛhari,
and this obviously proves that he must have been active after him. The decisive
fact to set an even more precise date for the grammarian is contained in a passage
of Bhartṛhari’s masterwork, the Vākyapadīya (VP), in which the author refers to
his teacher, whose name, Vasurāta, is revealed by the commentator Puṇyarāja.
Now a grammarian named Vasurāta is mentioned in a biography of Vasubandhu
composed by Paramārtha. Such Vasurāta, we are told, was a contemporary and
a fierce rival of Vasubandhu. Elaborating on all this information, Frauwallner
concluded that this Vasurāta must have been the same man Puṇyarāja regards as
Bhartṛhari’s teacher. On this basis, he dated the author of the VP to the second half
of the fifth c. CE, a date that has never seriously been questioned so far.26
We have little information on Bhartṛhari’s life, and what we have is largely
spurious. As for the works he composed, we can be reasonably sure of only two.27
A commentary on Patañjali’s Mahābhāṣya, which is only partially preserved
(Iyer, 1969, pp. 4–5), and his masterpiece, a long, independent treatise on various
aspects of language known as ‘Treatise on Sentence and Word’, or Vākyapadīya.
The VP is composed of roughly 2000 kārikās in anuṣṭḥub meter; it is divided
into three main chapters, each dealing—at least in theory but the subdivision is
often fuzzy—with a specific topic. The first chapter is mainly dedicated to the

20

Historical and philosophical contexts

philosophical foundations of the work, dealing with ontological and epistemological notions alongside linguistic ones; the second is largely focused on establishing
that in semantics, the prominent linguistic unit is the sentence and not the word;
the third, divided in turn in 14 subchapters (samuddeśas), is a vast and mixed
section that discusses in detail linguistic and philosophical problems the other
two chapters just touch upon. It is the VP that shows how Bhartṛhari extended the
range of topics a grammarian can discuss. Apart from the analysis of purely linguistic issues—which is surely present—the text is so infused with philosophical
preoccupations that on the whole, the work is less as an investigation of the grammatical technicalities of Sanskrit than an in-depth exploration of how language is
related to the way humans understand reality and act in the world. Bhartṛhari possibly composed a further work, a commentary on the first two chapters of the VP,
known as Vṛtti. The attribution of this work to the author of the kārikās is a matter
of fact for the whole ancient tradition, but it has been put into question by modern
scholarship. On the basis of philological and conceptual grounds, some scholars
have claimed that the commentary must have been composed by a later author.28
Others, on the other hand, prefer to remain faithful to the tradition, thus considering Bhartṛhari the author of both the stanzas and the commentary thereon.29 As of
today, the question is not yet settled. The reasons adduced by the supporters of
a different authorship of the Vṛtti are sometimes well grounded, yet they do not
seem sufficient to overthrow a long tradition that claims for the same authorship.
For this reason, in this book I am adopting the traditional stance, and I will treat
the Vṛtti as composed by the author of the kārikās.
Some words must be spent also on the commentarial tradition the VP generated
throughout the centuries. Nowadays, three ancient commentaries are still extant,
excluding the Vṛtti. The first one, an extended analysis of the first chapter of the
stanzas and the Vṛtti thereon, is called Sphuṭākṣarā, even if it is best known by the
generic name of Paddhati. Its author is Vṛṣabhadeva or Śrivṛṣabha. We have no
information about him except for the scant details he himself gives in the dedicatory verses of his work. Likewise, his date is unknown, too, even though there
are reasons to believe that he must have lived around the eighth c. CE.30 A second
work, commenting on the kārikās of the second kāṇḍa, is ascribed to Puṇyarāja.
A third one, a commentary on VP’s third chapter, was composed by an author
named Helārāja. Puṇyarāja’s and Helārāja’s dates and geographical collocation
are a controversial issue: their activity has been connected in several ways to the
culture of Kashmir, and both might have been native of the valley. Nevertheless,
our present knowledge does not allow more than some tentative hypotheses. In the
case of Puṇyarāja, he himself mentions the name of his master, Sāśāṅkaśiṣya, in
his work. For this reason, it has been suggested that Puṇyarāja could have been the
disciple of a certain Sahadeva (a commentator on Vamana’s Kāvyālaṅkārasūtra),
in turn a disciple of Śaśāṅkadhara. This would explain the name Sāśāṅkaśiṣya
(literally, ‘pupil of Sāśāṅka’) attributed to Sahadeva. Both Śaśāṅkadhara and
Sahadeva were active in Kashmir (Iyer, 1969, pp. 41–42).31 Helārāja’s relations
with the valley can be established on slightly firmer grounds. As Iyer points out,

Historical and philosophical contexts 21
the name Helārāja is mentioned in Kalhana’s Rājataraṅgiṇī (twelfth c. CE), in
reference to an earlier author who himself too wrote on the history of Kashmir.
Moreover, Iyer noticed that Helārāja’s father bore the name of Bhutirājā, which
is the same of one of Abhinavagupta’s gurus.32 Finally, in his commentary on the
Bhagavadgītā, Abhinavagupta tells that also Bhutirāja’s son (therefore, perhaps,
Helārāja) was one of his teachers. On this basis, Iyer sees the possibility that
Helārāja was one of Abhinavagupta’s preceptors, thus dating him to the tenth c.
(Iyer, 1969, pp. 39–40).
Although all these details may sound overwhelming, the hint at a relationship between Bhartṛhari’s commentators and Kashmir’s intellectual atmosphere
is important and should not be brushed aside hastily. In particular, the connection between Helārāja and Abhinavagupta could have been a major cause for the
attraction the Pratyabhijñā philosophers felt for Bhartṛhari’s thought. Concerning
this attraction, however, something more must be said, because it is an attitude
that emerges only in the mature phase of the Pratyabhijñā. In fact, at an earlier
stage of the school, Somānanda adopted a quite different stance on Bhartṛhari,
and in the ŚD, he dedicated himself to dismantle one of the most renown theories
of the VP, the one concerned with the differentiation of language into different
levels.33 Somānanda’s criticism boiled down to show that the level of language
the VP regards as the highest (called paśyantī vāc) is actually superseded by a
further one (parā vāc). It has been noted that the tone of Somānanda’s reproach
is particularly harsh and the arguments sophistic (Torella, 2008, pp. 509–513;
Nemec, 2005). Quite tellingly, in a rather famous verse, Somānanda concludes
that grammarians should not to deal with philosophical thinking, for it is something beyond their capacities.34 All this criticism seem to disappear in Utpaladeva’s texts, and the change of attitude towards Bhartṛhari is clearly a dividing
line between an early phase in the history of the Pratyabhijñā, encapsulated in
the ŚD, and a mature one, culminating in the works of Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta. It is therefore not surprising that the fact has attracted the interest of
scholars, who have been puzzled by how quickly—the time of a generation—the
consideration and the status of a thinker changed within the same intellectual
circle. Readers can find extensive treatments of the question in several sources,
particularly in one of Torella’s contributions (Torella, 2008).35 In it the turnaround of Somānanda’ followers is analytically studied, with a special stress on
Utpaladeva’s double standard—very understated and controlled while acting as
Somānanda’s loyal commentator in the ŚD but clearly influenced by Bhartṛhari’s
ideas as an independent thinker.
As for this book, it does not advance new hypotheses as to why Utpaladeva
changed the Pratyabhijñā’s attitude towards Bhartṛhari. My main concern is rather
to understand how Bhartṛhari influenced Utpaladeva, in particular how certain
ideas the grammarian developed were crucial to the Śaiva’s conception of consciousness. To appreciate all this, we must start by examining this Pratyabhijñā’s
central apologetic argument, that is, the notion that a mental episode, a cognition,
can never be treated as a content of knowledge.

22

Historical and philosophical contexts

Notes
1 For an in-depth overview of Śaiva post-scriptural exegesis, see Sanderson (2007).
2 As Torella puts it: “These texts give voice to a need for a more direct participation
in the experience of the divine, no longer seen as a transaction managed by specialized personnel with a view to obtaining clearly defined and circumscribed benefits—
culminating in an impersonal liberation projected into an indefinite future—but as a
transfiguration here and now of the whole person, whose components, including the
purely physical, become the very protagonists of the path of the liberation and not the
unwelcome extras” (Torella, 2002, p. x).
3 This passage from the Kulārṇavatantra is quite suggestive: “The Veda is higher than
everything [else]; the Vaiṣṇava [teachings] are superior to the Veda. The Śaiva [teachings] are higher than the Vaiṣṇava [teachings]; the teachings of the Right are higher
than the Śaiva. The teachings of the Left are higher than those of the Right; those
teachings ‘whose end is realization’ (Siddhānta) are higher than those of the Left. The
Kaula teachings are higher than those teachings whose end is realization. There is no
[teaching] whatsoever that is higher than the Kaula”. Cited in White (2003, p. 152).
According to André Padoux: “Le traditions tantriques, en général, ne rejettent toutefois
pas complètement le tradition brahmanique issue du Véda. Elles la considèrent comme
valable, mais seulement sur un plan inférieur, comme un enseignement ou des règles
générales de base aux—quels s’ajoutent sans le oblitérer le règles plus spéciales, plus
hautes des tantras” (Padoux, 2010, p. 29).
4 Sanderson enlists nine main non-Saiddhāntika systems: (1) the cult of Svacchandabhairava and his consort Aghoreśvarī, put forth in the Svacchandatantra; (2) that of
Caṇḍa Kāpālinī, taught in the Picumata/Brahmayāmala; (3) that of the sisters Jayā,
Vijayā, Jayantī, and Aparājīta, taught in the Vīṇāśikha; (4) that of the goddesses Parā,
Parāparā, and Aparā, taught in the Siddhayogeśvarīmata, the Mālinīvijayottara, and
other texts, destined to be known later in Kashmir as the Trika system; (5) the cult
of Kālasaṃkarṣiṇī Kālī, taught in the Jayadrathayāmala and in the scriptures of
the Krama in Kashmir; (6) the cult of Kubjikā in the Kubjikāmata; (7) the cult of
Tripurasundarī put forth in the Vāmakeśvarīmata; (8) the cult of the Nityā goddesses,
taught in the Nityākaula; and (9) the cult of Amṛteśvara and his consort Amṛtalakṣmī,
taught in the Netratantra. All these texts and cults can be further divided into those
belonging to the ‘Mantra corpus’ (mantrapīṭha) and those belonging to the ‘Vidyā
corpus’ (vidyāpīṭha). In the first case, the cult is directed at the male deity Bhairava,
whereas in the second case, the focus shifts on the goddess, who, venerated in the form
of power (śakti) of the god, tends to assume a more prominent role. Moreover, it must
also be noted that the Vidyāpīṭha corpus often sanctions more esoteric and antinomic
practices than the Mantrapīṭha one.
5 A religious history of Kashmir is reconstructed by Sanderson (2009a). See also ­Funiyama
(1994).
6 It is not totally clear whether Somānanda composed also an auto-commentary on the
ŚD, even if it looks improbable. See Nemec (2011, pp. 14–15).
7 As for the social milieu of these authors, Sanderson has shown that most of them bore
the royal title of Rājānaka, indicating their position as royal ministers. The fact that they
were close to the court is also suggested that they contributed to “belles—lettres and
the theory of poetry, drama, dance, and music”. See Sanderson (2007, pp. 240–241).
8 This what Abhinavagupta says. See the remark in ĪPVV I, p. 16: sphuraṇaprārambhaḥ
sūtre sphuraṇanirvāhas tu vṛttāv iti paramārthata aikyam anayor ekakālakṛtatvāt.
9 In recent years, scholars have reconstructed several fragments of the Vivṛti, mainly on
the basis of marginal annotations found in manuscripts of other works. See Kawajiri
(2016a, 2016b), Ratié (2015, 2016, 2017), and Torella (1988, 2007a, 2007b, 2007c,
2007d, 2012a).

Historical and philosophical contexts 23
10 As Sanderson points out, the idea that existed a single, unitary body of practices and
beliefs called Kashmir Śaivism, even after the synthesis operated by Abhinavagupta, is
incorrect: “The persistent term ‘Kashmir Śaivism’ or ‘Kashmiri Śaivism’ is therefore
doubly misleading. Its current use is mistaken because it excludes the Siddhānta, but
it also confuses by fostering the illusion that non-Saiddhantika Śaivism was a single,
doctrinally unified whole” (Sanderson, 2009a, p. 123).
11 The following passage from K.C. Pandey’s pioneering monograph on Abhinavagupta
can be taken as an example of this attitude: “The fact . . . is that the philosophical system
of Kashmir, with Abhinava’s contribution to it left out of consideration, loses most of its
importance. His contribution to the ‘Realistic Idealism’, is of the same nature as that of
the great Śaṅkara to the monistic idealism of the Vedānta” (Pandey, 1963, p. 167).
12 The distinction is introduced by Abhinavagupta in the ĪPVV (I, p. 2–3), but that the
idea is already considered in the Vivṛti is clear from the commentary. The three works
are also associated with the three different levels of language. The vaikharī level, the
audible language, is associated with the Vivṛti; the madhyamā level, the mental language, with the Vṛtti; and the paśyantī level, the subtle and timeless language, with the
kārikās. See Torella (2002, p. xlii).
13 so ‘yam avakra evābhinavo mārgaḥ sākṣātkṛtaparameśvarabhaṭṭārakākārair bhaṭṭaś­
rīsomānandapādaiḥ śivadṛṣṭināmni prakaraṇe mayā yuktinibandhanena hṛdayaṃ
gamīkṛtaḥ (ĪPKVṛ 4.16). All translations in the book are mine, except when explicitely
noted.
14 The expression sākṣātkṛta was originally reserved to the Vedic seers, the ṛṣis. On this
point, see the lengthy discussions by Aklujkar (2009) and Wezler (2001).
15 In Torella’s words: “he [Somānanda] alternates expositions of a non-dualistic doctrine
that is felt to be still very near to its scriptural sources—though these cannot be clearly
distinguished—logical justifications, visionary tirades and summary dismissal of
opposing doctrines” (Torella, 2002, pp. xiv–xv). Nemec claims that the ŚD was probably written for a circle of tantric initiates with philosophical interests (Nemec, 2011,
p. 13). Its tone is thus set somewhere between those of the SpKā and ŚSū and that of
the ĪPK: “the ŚD is rather more philosophically oriented than the more yogically and/
or mystically inclined SpKā and ŚSū, while being simultaneously more theologically
oriented and coloured by scripture than the ĪPK” (Nemec, 2011, pp. 17–18).
16 kathaṃcid āsādya maheśvarasya dāsyaṃ janasyāpy upakāram icchan / samastasaṃ­
patsamavāptihetūṃ tatpratyabhijñām upapādayāmi // (ĪPK 1.1.1).
17 parameśvaraprasādād eva labdhā°.
18 On Dignāga, see the seminal work of Hattori (1968). For a reconstruction of the
­Sanskrit text of his masterwork, the Pramāṇasamuccaya, from Tibetan sources, see
Steinkellner (2005).
19 On this giant figure of Indian and Buddhist philosophy, the best succinct introduction is
Eltschinger (2010). Valuable and more extensive works are Dreyfus (1997) and Dunne
(2004).
20 The engagement between the school of Dignāga, the Mīmāṃsā, and the Nyāya possibly ignited the most fertile phase of classical Indian philosophy. Scholars, such as John
Dunne have emphasized that the Buddhists, the Mīmāṃsakas, and the Naiyāyikas,
shared common theoretical presuppositions and a common language, notwithstanding
their conflicting views (Dunne, 2004). Other scholars, such as Vincent Eltschinger,
have instead stressed that the relationship between the parties was quite conflictual
and that the logical-epistemological school of Buddhism occurred as a reaction to
the harsh, anti-Buddhist scolding that rose in the Brahmanical milieu from around
the sixth c. CE onwards, an attitude that is epitomized in the works of the Mīmāṃsā
­philosopher Kumārila (Eltschinger, 2014, pp. 154–190). See also Eltschinger (2007).
21 The term cittamātra is traditionally used to describe the doctrines of the Yogācāra
(or Vijñānavāda) school, a philosophical tradition based on the teachings of the

24

Historical and philosophical contexts

Saṃdhininirmocanasūtra (composed around the second c. CE), whose most influential
thinkers were Asaṅga, Vasubandhu, and Maitreyanātha (all lived in the fourth c. CE).
The school typically maintains that the perception of external phenomena is exclusively caused by the activity of the mind, without any need to assume the existence of
external realities. For an overview of the tradition, see Westerhoff (2018, pp. 140–216).
22 Nevertheless, whether this attitude can be ascribed to the earliest Pramaṇavādins, such
as Dignāga and Dharmakīrti, is open to debate. For an updated discussion of the question, see Kellner (2017).
23 It is actually quite sure that in the classical period Advaita Vedānta’s influence was
relatively modest. Much of the preeminent status the tradition has gained over time is
due to later—modern and early contemporary—historiography.
24 The differences between these two approaches to non-dualism are well illustrated by
Alper (1979).
25 The scarce information we have on pre-Śaṅkarian Advaita Vedānta—often just the
names of authors quoted in later works—are presented and discussed in Nakamura
(1983).
26 A potential challenge to Bhartṛhari’s date has come recently from the work of Helmut
Krasser, who has proposed an earlier date for some crucial Buddhist philosophers,
including Dignāga. If the hypothesis was confirmed, Bhartṛhari should be dated a century or so earlier. However, since Krasser’s conjecture is still controversial, in the following, I shall abide by the standard date. See Krasser (2012) for further details.
27 It is not clear whether the grammarian Bhartṛhari was also the author of a well-known
collection of epigrammatic poems, the Subhāṣitatriśatī or Śatakatrayam, which is
ascribed to an author with the same name. The present scholarly persuasion is that
they are two different persons (Iyer, 1969, pp. 10–14; Kusambi, 1948). Furthermore,
Kashmirian sources, including the authors under discussion in this book, attribute to
Bhartṛhari another work, now lost, whose title is Ṣaddhātusamikṣā. For an extended
and updated discussion of this work, see Ratié (2018).
28 The first to suggest that the Vṛtti could have been composed by another author was
Madeleine Biardeau. Biardeau’s argument is based on three kinds of evidence. The
first consists of passages of the Vṛtti that seem to be at odds with what is stated in
the stanzas. The second kind revolves around the idea that the commentary is using
a technical terminology that was not in use at the end of the fifth c., when Bhartṛhari
presumably composed the kārikās. In this regard, Biardeau considers the use of the
terms vivarta and pariṇāma. According to her interpretation, in the kārikās, both words
express the generic notion of ‘evolution’, that is, they indicate the transformation of the
unitary metaphysical principle, Brahman, into the differentiated phenomena of experience. By contrast, the Vṛtti seems to hint at a fine-grained distinction between the two
concepts, with vivarta indicating an ‘illusory transformation’, which actually does not
take place, whilst pariṇāma expressing a ‘real’ evolution of Brahman into something
else. The distinction between the two terms is a standard notion of classical Advaita
Vedānta and Biardeau takes it as a proof of the later composition of the Vṛtti. The third
and final argument consists in the fact that the Vṛtti seems to allude to the division of
Mīmāṃsā in the two sub-schools of Bhāṭṭas and Prābhākaras, something that Biardeau
does not detect in the stanzas. Biardeau’s view against the single authorship has been
adopted later on by other scholars, in particular Johannes Bronkhorst and Jan Houben.
Bronkhorst focuses on passages where the Vṛtti appears to contradict the stanzas (VP
1.6, 1.13, 1.99, and 1.159) and on the problematic use of the epithet tatrabhavān, ‘honourable’, attested in the Vṛtti to indicate the author of the stanzas, which must therefore
be a different one. For his part, Houben takes into account a passage of the Vṛtti on
VP 1.46 already discussed by Bronkhorst (1988) and Aklujkar (1993b). The first pāda
of this stanza runs as follows: ātmabhedaṃ tayoḥ kecid astīti āhuḥ purāṇagāḥ. The
kārikā refers to an essential difference (ātmabheda) that exists between two kinds of

Historical and philosophical contexts 25
word (upādānaśabda). The problem with the sentence is the presence of the accusative case in ātmabhedam. Considering the syntactical construction, one should expect
ātmabhedaḥ, with the nominative ending. The point is commented in the Vṛtti with the
following expression: ātmabhedasya bruvikarmatve dvitīya vākyasvarūpānukaraṇe tu
prathamā. In Iyer’s translation: “when the word ‘essential difference’ is the object of
the verb brū (āhuḥ) it takes the second case-affix (dvitīyā) but when the whole sentence
as uttered by the followers of tradition is imitated it takes the first-case affix”. This
remark of the Vṛtti, which justifies both readings of ātmabheda, is taken by ­Houben
as a proof that the authors of the two texts were different: “whether we interpret it in
accordance with possibility a): the Vṛtti author is confronted with two different readings: or b): the Vṛtti author acknowledges the only one reading in the kārikā and mentions the other one on his own accord; in either case (c): the author of the Vṛtti must
have been different from the kārikā, unless we assume (d): that the latter was a debutant, uncertain about his own capabilities and ready to interrupt his discourse on subtle philosophical issues with apologetic, technical comments on his choice of words”
(Houben, 1997c, pp. 182–184). See also Biardeau (1964a); Bronkhorst (1988, 1991);
Houben (1997a, 1997b).
29 The most notable advocate of the single-authorship view is Ashok Aklujkar. He generally disagrees with what seems to be the basic assumption of the supporters of separate
authorship. According to them, every time the Vṛtti provides alternative explanations
of the kārikās, one has to suspect a different author for the commentary. Aklujkar is
clear in rejecting this premise, as he writes: “What seems to be different explanations
are also statements of different theses and thoughts acceptable to Bhartṛhari on different levels and in different contexts”. On the contrary, he contends that every kārikā is
crafted with the purpose of being deliberately generic and vague and therefore ready
to be integrated and explained by the Vṛtti. This implies that the text was conceived
by Bhartṛhari as articulated in two different levels since the beginning and that kārikās
and Vṛtti must be read as a single work. In this regard, Aklujkar is very clear: “No
only I do uphold the validity of the traditional ascription, but I also maintain that the
V [Vṛtti] is an inseparable part of the Vākyapadīya and that is wrong to think of the
Vākayapadīya as a work consisting of the kārikās only” (Aklujkar, 1972, p. 184). See
Iyer (1969, pp. 17–40) for a discussion of Biardeau’s arguments and Aklujkar (1993b)
for a reply to Bronkhorst (1988, 1991). See also Pind (2003) for a discussion of the
question from the point of view of Buddhist literature.
30 For a discussion of this author and his work, see Ferrante (2013, 2015).
31 It is worth mentioning that according to Aklujkar, the commentary on the second
chapter of the VP, traditionally credited to Puṇyarāja, must actually be attributed to
Helārāja. The latter probably commented on the whole VP, but only the part covering
the third kāṇḍa is preserved (Aklujkar, 1974).
32 Bhutirāja is mentioned in Abhinavagupta’s Malinīvijayavārttikas (Iyer, 1969, p. 39).
33 The notion is elaborated in VP 1.159 and the Vṛtti thereon; see Chapter 5 for a discussion of the passage.
34 vaiyakaranatām tyaktvā vijñānānveṣaṇena kim/bhavatām aprastutena na kevalam
ihoditam // (ŚD 2.72).
35 The question has been touched upon by other scholars too. See, for instance, Gnoli
(1959), Seyfort Ruegg (1959), Dwivedi (1991), Filliozat (1994), and Rastogi (2009).

2

The Buddhist doctrine of
non-self

The main preoccupation of Utpaladeva’s version of the Pratyabhijñā is to counter
the Buddhist criticism of the idea that conscious beings possess a unitary cognitive component that persists throughout lifetime and possibly beyond. Since
the Śaiva thinkers defended the idea that all reality ultimately comes down to an
all-pervading self, their first task was to take into account and refute the arguments the Buddhist have deployed against the notion of personhood. It is therefore useful, before considering the Pratyabhijñā’s reasons, to have a look at how
the Buddhist tradition has dealt with the question and how the Kashmiri authors
have represented the Buddhist doctrine in their own works. As it happens in most
Indian philosophical texts, the first sections of the ĪPK contain the so-called preliminary view, or pūrvapakṣa, a part that is devoted to spell the positions of the
opponents, with the purpose to confute them afterwards. In this chapter, we first
examine some general arguments Buddhism has advanced in support of the doctrine that there is no self. After that, we consider the way in which Utpaladeva has
rendered the Buddhist positions in his own works.

The argument from impermanence
For the Buddhists, the notions of ‘self’, ‘I’, and ‘personhood’ are all fictitious. The idea—conveyed in Sanskrit by expressions like anātman ‘non-self’,
nairatmyavāda, ‘doctrine that there is no self’, or in Pāli by the term anattā—is
one of the most original contributions Buddhism has given to the philosophical and
religious debate of ancient India. Together with suffering (duḥkha) and impermanence (anitya), anātman is one of the three marks (trilakṣaṇas) of existence, and
it is often regarded as the key teaching of the Buddha, the doctrine whose comprehension eventually leads the practitioner to the liberation from the cycle of rebirths.
The idea is not mentioned in what is traditionally viewed as Buddha’s first
­discourse—the Dharmacakrapravartanasūtra (in Pāli, Dhammacakkappavattanasutta)—but it is addressed in the very next one, the Anātmalakṣaṇasūtra (in Pāli
Anattalakkhanasutta), which is wholly dedicated to the question:
Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Bārāṇasi
in the Deer Park at Isipatana. There the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus
of the group of five thus: “Bhikkhus!”

The Buddhist doctrine of non-self 27
“Venerable sir!” those bhikkhus replied. The Blessed One said this:
“Bhikkhus, form is non-self. For if, bhikkhus, form were self, this form
would not lead to affliction, and it would be possible to have it of form: ‘Let
my form be thus; let my form not be thus’. But because form is non-self, form
leads to affliction, and it is not possible to have it of form: ‘Let my form be
thus; let my form not be thus’.
“Feeling is non-self. . . . Perception is non-self. . . . Volitional formations
are non-self. . . . Consciousness is non-self. For if, bhikkhus, consciousness
were self, this consciousness would not lead to affliction, and it would be
possible to have it of consciousness: ‘Let my consciousness be thus; let my
consciousness not be thus’. But because consciousness is non-self, consciousness leads to affliction, and it is not possible to have it of consciousness: ‘Let
my consciousness be thus; let my consciousness not be thus’.
“What do you think, bhikkhus, is form permanent or impermanent?”—
“Impermanent, venerable sir.”—“Is what is impermanent suffering or
happiness?”—“Suffering, venerable sir.”—“Is what is impermanent, suffering, and subject to change fit to be regarded thus: ‘This is mine, this I am, this
is my self’?”—“No, venerable sir.”
“Is feeling permanent or impermanent? . . . Is perception permanent or
impermanent? . . . Are volitional formations permanent or impermanent? . . .
Is consciousness permanent or impermanent?”—“Impermanent, venerable
sir.”—“Is what is impermanent suffering or happiness?” “Suffering, venerable sir.”—“Is what is impermanent, suffering, and subject to change fit to be
regarded thus: ‘This is mine, this I am, this is my self’?”—“No, venerable sir.”
“Therefore, bhikkhus, any kind of form whatsoever, whether past, future,
or present, internal or external, gross or subtle, inferior or superior, far or
near, all form should be seen as it really is with correct wisdom thus: ‘This is
not mine, this I am not, this is not my self’.
“Any kind of feeling whatsoever. . . . Any kind of perception whatsoever. . . . Any kind of volitional formations whatsoever. . . . Any kind of consciousness whatsoever, whether past, future, or present, internal or external,
gross or subtle, inferior or superior, far or near, all consciousness should be
seen as it really is with correct wisdom thus: ‘This is not mine, this I am not,
this is not my self’.
“Seeing thus, bhikkhus, the instructed noble disciple experiences revulsion
towards form, revulsion towards feeling, revulsion towards perception, revulsion towards volitional formations, revulsion towards consciousness. Experiencing revulsion, he becomes dispassionate. Through dispassion [his mind]
is liberated. When it is liberated there comes the knowledge: ‘It’s liberated’.
He understands: ‘Destroyed is birth, the holy life has been lived, what had to
be done has been done, there is no more for this state of being’ ”.
That is what the Blessed One said. Elated, those bhikkhus delighted in the
Blessed One’s statement. And while this discourse was being spoken, the
minds of the bhikkhus of the group of five were liberated from the taints by
non-clinging.
(Bhikku Bodhi, 2003, pp. 901–903)

28

The Buddhist doctrine of non-self

The purpose of the discourse is to establish that the notion of self is delusive. In
analyzing the words of the Buddha, one should first examine what he meant when
speaking about self. Though the Buddha talks about the notion only in a negative
way, the characteristics a self-like entity must possess emerge quite clearly. First,
a self must be the essential aspect of the human psychological makeup, the element that persists over time, and which is therefore permanent. Second, it must
be an entity that controls and coordinates all other elements of personhood, both
physical and mental. Third, an insight on the true nature of self should have soteriological consequences, thus leading to some state of beatitude. An examination
of these three features shows how the Buddhist analysis reflects three common
notions ­Brahmanical traditions have adopted to define self since an early period.
They viewed the self as a permanent substance (dravya) that remains unchanged
over time; as something that has the role of an inner-controller (antaryāmin), and
especially in the Vedāntic and Upaniṣadic literature, Brahmanical traditions also
claimed that an insight on the true nature of self leads to bliss and liberation from
the cycle of rebirths.
To prove that an entity having such characteristics is a fictitious construction,
the Buddha proceeds in a negative way. He starts by defining what the human
physical and mental makeup is made of. Thereafter, he shows that none of the elements of this makeup possesses the three defining features of self we have just pinpointed. For the Buddha, human nature can be reduced to five basic components:
form, feelings, perceptions, volitions, and consciousness. Collectively known as
skandhas (Pāli khandha), that is, ‘bundles’ or ‘aggregates’, these elements are
meant to account for all aspects of experience. Form or body (rūpa) indicates
any physical or bodily shape; feelings (vedanā) designate three specific sensations, those of pleasure, pain, and indifference; perceptions (saṃjñā) stand for the
mental content of sensory perceptions, such as a patch of blue or the smell of a
rose; volitions (saṃskāra) indicate the mental dispositions that cause both mental and external activities, like hunger, jealousy, anger, attentiveness, desire etc.;
consciousness (vijñāna) stands for the awareness of one’s own mental contents
(Siderits, 2007, p. 36). The skandhas are also often indicated by the expression
nāma-rūpa, literally ‘name and form’. In this latter case, the term nāma stands for
the four mental aggregates, that is, perceptions, feelings, volitions, and consciousness. They are called this way because they are not perceived by the senses, for
they can be expressed only through conceptual activity and, eventually, by means
of language. Conversely, the term rūpa indicates all that has a concrete, physical
nature and is therefore amenable to sensory awareness.
In the discourse, the Buddha is precisely claiming that none of these five aggregates can be the self, because none is permanent, acts as a controller, or is conducive to bliss. Indeed, according to the Buddha, it is precisely the opposite: all
skandhas are transitory, no one has the characteristics of the controller, and they
all eventually lead to affliction. Let us leave aside this last, soteriological aspect
of the nature of self and focus on the first two claims, those according to which no
aggregate is permanent or acts as the controller of the others. Mark Siderits has

The Buddhist doctrine of non-self 29
labelled the first the ‘argument from impermanence’, the second ‘the argument
from control’. The argument from impermanence can be summarized as follows:
1
2
3
4

Since form, feelings, perceptions, volitions and consciousness are
impermanent,
since the human psychophysical makeup consists of nothing but these five
bundles,
and since the self must be by definition permanent,
the conclusion is that there is no self.

From a logical point of view, the reasoning is evidently sound: if the three premises are true, the conclusion is automatically true. The question is, of course,
whether the premises are defensible. Now, premise 3 is unproblematic because
those advocating the existence of self maintain that it must be an enduring entity.
Premise 1 requires a more thorough discussion. The Buddhists start their argumentation by distinguishing the rūpa skandha from the nāma ones. In the former
case, the hypothesis to reject is that the self corresponds to our physical body. This
hypothesis can be formulated in two ways. The first is to suppose that the body
is permanent over the course of several lives. Even if it sounds counterintuitive,
the hypothesis is quite central for the South Asian context, since the Buddha and
most of his contemporary opponents backed the idea of a series of lives combined
with the notion of retribution of actions. However, one can defend also a weaker
version of the notion that rūpa corresponds to self by arguing that a body remains
the same for the duration of a single lifetime. As far as the strong version of the
argument is concerned, the very fact that a body declines and dies is enough to
show that it cannot be regarded as extended over several lives. Accordingly, a
body is not at all permanent, and it cannot be the self. But what about the second,
weaker alternative? Is it not true that we are strongly induce to think that our
personhood remains essentially the same over the years that make up our single
lifetime? What would the Buddhists reply to this? Mark Siderits has suggested
several answers to the objection (Siderits, 2007, pp. 39–40). Generally speaking,
the Buddhist retort would focus on the idea that there is no body as a whole but
just smaller parts composing it. These parts are never stable and exist in a state of
constant change. More specifically, Siderits considers the case in which the self
is conceived as a specific part of the body, such as the heart or the brain. In this
regard, if one undergoes a heart transplant, few would agree that after the surgery
the person is not the same as before. This principle seems to be valid also in the
case of a brain transplant, which is a metaphysically possible scenario. All this
seems to point to the conclusion that there is actually no part of the human physical makeup that is permanent. Additionally, one can also argue that living bodies
are actually made up of cells that are perpetually renovated (Siderits, 2007, p. 40).
This is certainly not an argument the historical Buddha could have put forward.
Nevertheless, it is a consideration that further legitimates the Buddhist claim that
rūpa cannot be the self.

30

The Buddhist doctrine of non-self

Let us now turn to the nāma-skandhas, the mental aggregates. Here the situation is far more complex, since the notion that selfhood is something ingrained in
our mental dimension—rather than in the physical one—is stronger and less easy
to reject. Here the main contention of the Buddha is that to identify the self with
something mental is illusory, because, simply put, there is no such thing as the
mind. All that we actually experience in our lives is a series of mental events that
come and go in an uninterrupted series. These events are instantaneous—they take
place and disappear in a moment—and are linked together by a cause and effect
relationship. What normally happens is that this stream of mental events is easily
mistaken for a reified entity existing over them, an entity we are used to call mind.
But this is precisely an illusion. How strong is the Buddhist argument? For a start,
it is not difficult to acknowledge that some of our mental events are actually shortlived and far from being permanent. Think, for instance, to the desire of eating an
apple or buying a new pencil. Likewise, perceptions, too, look like transitory. Still,
the situation gets more complicated if we consider what Siderits calls “instinctual desires”, volitions that appear to be really entrenched in our human nature,
like the will to avoid pain or, adopting Siderits’s example, the desire to escape a
life-threatening situation. In this case, these desires look like permanent features
of human psyches and therefore as good candidates for the role of self. Still, the
Buddhists would keep rejecting the possibility. Their line of reasoning is that these
instinctual desires are not always manifest but come to the surface only in certain,
unpleasant situations—more specifically, when one has a sensory awareness of
something dangerous going on. A fact of this sort can be explained by arguing
that there is an inner, persisting tendency to escape dangerous situations, which is
latent and becomes manifest only given the right conditions. But also, and this is
the position a Buddhist would favour, by assuming that there is a stimulus–­reaction
link between a dangerous circumstance and our desire to escape it. Differently
put, desire to escape is event related: it manifests at due time, disappears, and then
resurfaces at another occasion. As Siderits suggests, the Buddhist explanation of
instinctual volitions does not postulate the existence of something unobservable,
that is, a persisting, hidden desire to escape life-threatening situation. Therefore, on
the basis of Occam’s razor or by the corresponding Indian principle of conciseness
of explanation (lāghava), the Buddhist view on the matter looks like preferable.
It remains to consider premise 2, which Siderits call the “Exhaustiveness
­Principle”. The main premise of the Buddha’s argument is that the human makeup
is made up of five skandhas, not one more. It goes without saying that if one is
able to prove that in experience, there is actually something more than the five
aggregates, the argument from impermanence will be seriously affected. Now,
what the Exhaustiveness Principle seems to leave out of the picture is the subjective, private dimension of personhood. By accepting that the five skandhas are all
that exists, one would grant the existence of physical entities and mental events
but of no one to which these entities and events belong. It is important to keep in
mind this objection because it is a serious one, and it is exactly the issue the Śaiva
thinkers are going to raise against the Buddhist dismissal of personhood.

The Buddhist doctrine of non-self 31

The argument from control
The second argument put forward in the Anātmalakṣaṇasūtra is the argument
from control. When the Buddha says “It is not possible to have it of form: ‘Let
my form be thus; let my form not be thus’ ”, he is meaning that rūpa and all other
skandhas cannot work as the controller of others, or, as Siderits puts it, none
of them can perform an executive function on the others. The argument from
control is based on the idea that something cannot perform the executive function on itself. On the basis of this principle, a self must be an entity on which the
executive function is never performed, for it is always the subject of the executive function and never the object. Once this principle is established, the argument proceeds like the one from impermanence. Each skandha can actually be
the object of the executive function because I can dislike and desire to change
my bodily form, my feelings, my perceptions and volitions, my consciousness. If
this true—and it is quite evident that it is—then none of the skandhas can be the
self. Therefore, on the basis of the Exhaustiveness Principle, a self does not exist.
Still, the fact that something is performing the executive function is evident and
requires an explanation. What is it? If not the self, the only possible answer for
the Buddhist is to adopt what Siderits calls a “shifting coalitions” strategy. The
idea is that it is never the one and the same part of the supposed personhood that
is always controlling the other parts but that this part changes continuously. So,
at one time, that which performs the executive function is a coalition between a
volition and a perception; for instance, I could see (perception) that my beard is
too long, and I could desire (volition) to trim it. In other cases, different coalitions emerge. At this point, an opponent would retort that by endorsing this view,
we would get several different I’s instead of the only one I seem to experience
when I say, “I have the desire to trim my beard”. In replying to this, a Buddhist
would in the end resort to the existence of two levels of truths. The idea is that
there is a conventional truth, which refers to the plane our everyday life. At this
level, we make use of many conceptual fabrications that are useful for practical
purposes—think, for instance, to notions such as those of relation, action, subject,
object, mind—but they are not truly real. In fact, there is a second level of truth,
the ultimate truth, which corresponds to how things really are. We can attain this
level only after we have overcome our own defilements and epistemic biases. In
the case of self, the conventional truth is that the word ‘I’ is nothing but a ‘convenient designator’, an expression we use to indicate the apparent persistence of
something performing the executive function over time. But things are not really
so. The notion of ‘I’ never stands for something ontologically real. From the point
of view of ultimate truth, there are neither one controller nor many. The only thing
that exists is an uninterrupted series of events, both mental and physical, that are
causally linked.
In conclusion, on the grounds of the arguments from permanence and from
control, the Buddha concludes that the self is a fabricated notion, more specifically, a mental reification of an endless chain of real, momentary cognitive states

32

The Buddhist doctrine of non-self

that are glued together by causal relations. In the Buddha’s view, to get rid of this
conception is possibly the most decisive step one can make towards deliverance.

The arguments from the ĪPK
The arguments I have described in the previous sections remain historically significant in the centuries that intervene between the Buddha’s lifetime and the
Pratyabhijñā’s flourishing. What changed was the interpretation of the ontological
nature of the momentary events the Buddhists regard as the fundamental components of reality. The earliest Buddhist philosophy, the one displayed in the texts
of the Abhidharma, tended to accept the existence of basic, unchangeable constituents of reality called dharmas. On the contrary, the ensuing thought, especially the one developed by the main schools of Mahāyāna Buddhism, brought the
notion of causal dependence to extremes, thus advocating the dependent nature
of all dharmas, and conceiving reality as a perennial stream of mental and physical events. In parallel with these developments, a heated debate on the issue of
selfhood started to emerge around the fifth or sixth c. CE and continued until
­Buddhism declined and eventually disappeared from the cultural life of South
Asia. The quarrel saw the confrontation between two sides: the supporters of the
real existence of self (which in the following, we are going to call with their
­Sanskrit name of Ātmavādins), normally Brahmanical authors, and the Buddhists,
who kept rejecting the notion. The most important factor in shaping the way the
Pratyabhijñā took part in the discussion on the nature of self was the development
of the Buddhist Pramāṇavāda tradition, which, as we have seen in Chapter 1, took
place between the sixth and seventh c. CE. As it will be clear later, Utpaladeva’s
rejection of nairātmyavāda is carried out by employing epistemological and logical arguments that belong to Pramāṇavāda’s theoretical framework.
Utpaladeva’s discussion about the existence of self is mostly contained in the
first chapter of the ĪPK, the ‘Chapter on Knowledge’ (Jñānādhikāra). ­Utpaladeva’s
argument against the Buddhist positions hinges on a careful analysis of the nature
of memory, a form of cognition the author considers a sort of privileged case
study. The reason is easy to see. Since memory is a cognition that is temporally
extended, it is somewhat intuitive to associate it with a subject of experience that
persists over time. After an initial section in which the author discusses the purpose of the work, the ‘Chapter on Knowledge’ begins by stating Pratyabhijñā’s
own position, the so-called definitive view or siddhānta. Utpaladeva first provides
a typological description of reality by provisionally distinguishing two categories of being, the conscious and the unconscious. However, immediately after,
he specifies that this distinction is only apparent, since unconscious entities are
ontologically dependent on conscious ones. According to Abhinavagupta’s explanation, this is due to the fact that an insentient object cannot be cognized independently from a conscious subject, a remark that makes right away clear the
non-dualistic outlook of the school. Accordingly, reality is regarded as made up
of a single ontological category, the conscious; non-conscious entities are nothing more than projections of conscious ones. The argument is then expanded by
stating that all entities are indeed the manifestation of a single unitary, conscious

The Buddhist doctrine of non-self 33
being, the self. Self, and conscious beings in general, are characterized by two
properties: knowledge and action.1 All this leads to the conclusion that all reality
is to be identified with consciousness, or self, which is ultimately the only existing knowing and acting subject. This basic non-dualistic doctrine, put forth in the
very first stanzas of the ĪPK, is philosophically defended in the first two chapters
of the work.
After stating his own view, Utpaladeva proceeds by presenting the objections
of those who reject the real existence of personhood, that is, the Buddhists. He had
probably in mind a vast array of Buddhist literature, from the earliest sources we
have considered in the previous secition, to the more recent developments in logic
and epistemology promoted by the Pramāṇavāda. The breadth of the arguments is
already clear at the very beginning of the chapter, where the belief in the existence
of self is immediately put into question:
One may object that there is one type of cognition in which the particular
appears, and another type, called mental elaboration, which is connected with
language and has manifold forms. In either case there is not any permanent
knowing subject, since he does not appear in them. Also the notion of “I”
actually refers to the body etc.2
This passage prompts some observations. The text clearly refers to the standard
Buddhist position according to which the ‘I’ is an illusory notion based on the
reification of some components of the psychophysical makeup. But Utpaladeva
also makes a more refined, epistemologically oriented observation that reduces
the means leading to a veridical cognition to just two: perception (pratyakṣa),
which is directed at the mere particular, and inference (anumāna), which is always
linguistically informed and whose content are concepts and universals. We have
briefly introduced this notion in Chapter 1 and seen that it was first advocated
by Dignāga. So here we have a first clear example of how deeply ­Utpaladeva’s
discourse was influenced by the Pramāṇavādins. Even more interesting is
the reason the text gives for not postulating the presence of self in perceptual
knowledge or inference. A self, the stanza says, is never perceived in either. The
statement, apparently unpretentious, actually hints at another possible means of
gaining knowledge, known as ‘non-perception’ (anupalabdhi). The status of non-­
perception as an independent pramāṇa is a debated issue in Indian epistemology,3
but in general, the Buddhist traditions did not admit it as a separate means of
knowledge, regarding it as a particular case of inference. According to a theory
mainly developed by Dharmakīrti, by perceiving the non-presence of an object
that is hypothetically perceivable, one can infer its absence.4 Dharmakīrti’s argument is obviously open to question, but once accepted, it becomes a powerful
weapon against the contention that there is a self, and for a quite simple reason.
Those who defend the existence of self conceive it as being always knowable.
Accordingly, if the Buddhists can prove that neither of the two admitted means of
knowledge, perception and inference, is able to prove the existence of a self, then
the only plausible conclusion is that a self does not exist, it is a fictitious notion,
it is just pseudo-knowledge.

34

The Buddhist doctrine of non-self

In the rest of the second section of the ‘Chapter on Knowedge’, Utpaladeva
examines a set of arguments against the existence of self, thus implementing a
typical strategy of the Indian argumentative tradition: the Buddhist stance is in
fact progressively spelled out through a series of hypothetical objections. None
of them is actually decisive for the Pratyabhijñā’s view, but all serve the rhetorical purpose of clarifying the pūrvapakṣa. Still, this section is of great significance because in it we come across the first discussion of the topic crucial to
Pratyabhijñā’s final demonstration of the existence of self, memory. The question
is brought up in ĪPK 1.2.3, in which an Ātmavādin claims that memory cannot be
explained without admitting the existence of self:
Since the earlier perception has disappeared at the moment of memory, how
can memory—being dependent on that earlier perception of the object—arise
if the awareness of this perception does not persist till that very moment [of
recollection]? This awareness, which persists in different times, is precisely
the self, the perceiving subject.5
The Ātmavādin’s s reasoning looks straightforward. The original cognition takes
place in the past and then disappears. If it is remembered, it is because its awareness persists over time. And this persisting awareness is nothing but the self.
Nonetheless, in the ensuing kārikās (ĪPK 1.2.4–5), the Buddhists weigh the claim
and eventually prove it to be false. In doing so, they take into consideration two
different ways of intending memory. First, memory can be regarded as the recollection of a thing or event x. Second, it can be intended as the recollection of the
original perception directed at the thing or event x. If the Ātmavādin contends
that memory is the recollection of a former perception together with its content
x, she is mistaken. For once the original perception of an object vanishes, that
very perception is irretrievable and so is its content.6 Accordingly, postulating the
existence of a self is useless. Then the Ātmavādin may try to explore the other
option by supposing that memory is a cognition that is directly attending to the
original content x, without, so to speak, the mediation of the former cognition.
Still, in this case, one must explain how the original content x continues to exist
up to the time of the later recollection. The standard answer to this question is
that the original perception leaves a chain of traces (called samṣkāras, ‘mental
traces or impressions’) that, one after another, bridge the gap between the earlier
cognition and the later recollection. But, the Buddhists argue, if one can explain
memory in this way, what is the point of postulating a self? Is it not more economical to admit that saṃskāras are enough to account for the entire process?7
The Buddhists are thus endorsing a mechanistic view of memory in which the
‘impressions’ make all the job and guarantee the connection between the original
cognition and its subsequent recollection. Utpaladeva nicely summarizes their
position as follows:
From perception derives a mental trace; when memory arises it follows
that earlier perception and makes that perception—in which the object is
immersed—manifest.8

The Buddhist doctrine of non-self 35
Still, the Ātmavādin would immediately come up with a counterargument.9
Even if one agrees on the role played by saṃskāras, one must nevertheless define
their nature. What are these mental traces? They can only be attributes, that is,
qualities of a substance. And this substance, the Ātmavādin would insist, can be
no other than the self, whose existence is therefore required. The Buddhist rejoinder to this objection is gripping because it draws on a basic doctrine of their
metaphysics, that is to say, on the impossibility to establish a real relation among
things.10 In this particular case, they apply the following reasoning: qualities are
either different or identical to a substance; there is no other logical possibility. If
they are different, how can they affect substance without modifying its unitary
nature? But, on the other hand, if qualities and substance are the same thing, then
there is no point in positing the existence of substance. Translating the argument
to fit the problem under discussion: if there is a self, what kind of relationship does
it have with its qualities? If it could be modified by them, then it would lose one
of its most fundamental properties, eternality or permanence (nityatvam). But if it
is unaffected by qualities, how can it be useful to explain memory? The Buddhist
conclusion is, again, that the idea of self is a mental construction.11
A further articulation of the nairātmyavāda criticizes another typical position of
the Ātmavādins, that is, the idea that cognition is a property of the self and therefore
it is distinct from it. Again, the main premise is that any relation is eventually unreal.
In this case, the one under discussion is between cognitions and self. Cognitions
can be conceived as either conscious or inert; there is no other option. If cognitions
are inert, they are useless in establishing external objects, but if they are conscious,
then they end up being eternal, like the self.12 But, paradoxically, if one allows
that a cognition is eternal, then one is forced to negate that a self possesses such a
cognition. The reason is that for the Buddhists, a relationship between two eternal
entities—in our case, the cognition and the self to which it belongs—is impossible.
Therefore, one must again conclude that the self is a non-existing entity.13
To overcome this objection, the Ātmavādin makes another move. She assumes
the existence of an intermediate level between the self and the external object, the
intellect (buddhi). This time the tactic is based on a conception derived from the
Sāṃkhya school whereby the intellect has a twofold nature, that is, it is capable
of being coloured by the ‘inertness’ of the external object but also fit to reflect
the sentiency of the self.14 Yet also in this case, the Buddhists quickly dismiss the
argument as inconclusive because to cognize an external object, the intellect must
be in the end sentient. And this would lead back to the previous case: what the
Ātmavādin calls here “intellect” is again the cognition itself, regarded as sentient.
But, as we saw earlier, if a cognition is sentient and eternal, it cannot be related to
another sentient reality, like the self is supposed to be by definition. With this last
refutation, Utpaladeva concludes the Buddhist pūrvapakṣa, and the reader is left
with an apparently coherent description of the way memory functions and a harsh
criticism of the idea that there is a subject of experience that is capable to know.15
We can sum up the Buddhist position as follows:
1

A self is a fictitious mental construct referring to the body or other components of the psychophysical complex.

36

The Buddhist doctrine of non-self

2

A self is useless to account for memory, which can be adequately explained
on the basis of the mental traces (saṃskāras) left by the past cognition.
It is logically untenable to maintain that the self is the knowing subject since
it cannot possess a cognition. A cognition can be either conscious or not. If
the former, then it would be permanent as the self, and no relation would
be possible between two permanent entities. If the latter, then the cognition
would be, so to speak, blind and unable to illuminate external objects.

3

Utpaladeva’s rejection of this picture starts immediately after.

Notes
1 vastūnāṃ jaḍājaḍabhedena dvaividhyam. tatra jaḍasvarūpasya jīvanniṣṭhā siddhiḥ,
jīvatāṃ punar jīvatvaṃ jīvanaṃ jñānakriye eva (ĪPVṛ 1.1.4). “There are two types
of entities: conscious and unconscious. With regard to this, the establishment of the
proper nature of the unconscious is based on what is living. What makes a living being
what it is, that is, its being alive, are knowledge and action”.
2 nanu svalakṣaṇābhāsaṃ jñānam ekaṃ paraṃ punaḥ / sābhilāpaṃ vikalpākhyāṃ
bahudhā nāpi taddvayam // nityasya kasyacid draṣṭus tasyātrānavabhāsataḥ /
ahaṃpratītir apy eṣā śarīrādyavasāyinī // (ĪPK 1.2.1–2).
3 ‘Non-perception’, or anupalabdhi, is accepted as an independent means of knowledge
only by the Bhaṭṭa Mīmāṃsā and the Advaita Vedānta. These schools argue that it is
necessary to postulate the existence of a different pramāṇa to account for absence. The
rationale is that perception by definition arises from a connection between the senses
and their object (indriyārthasannikarṣotpanna, NS 1.1.4), so the connection is impossible if the object of knowledge is missing. On the contrary, the Nyāya regards absence
as the lack of a specific qualification of the locus. For example, if there is no elephant in
my room, it is because the locus (my room) is qualified by the absence of an elephant.
Both presence and absence are therefore known by perception, the former directly, the
latter indirectly. See Jha (1964, pp. 143–146) and Perrett (2016, p. 102).
4 Differently from Nyāya and Mīmāṃsā, Dharmakīrti (PV 3.3–6) argues that absence is
inferred. His reasoning is roughly the following: (1) given the right perceptual conditions, if there were an elephant in my room, I would perceive it; (2) I do not perceive
any elephant in my room; (3) therefore, there is no elephant in my room. The problem
with this account is proposition 2. In Dharmakīrti’s view, I know proposition 2 by
inference. Nevertheless, it has been noted that this is not totally sound, since there is
risk of an infinite regress of inferences (Perrett, 2016, p. 102). On Dharmakīrti’s inference, see Hayes and Gillon (1991). On anupalabdhi, see Kellner (1997a, 1997b).
5 smṛtikāle pūrvānubhavanāśāt kathaṃ pūrvārthānubhavāvaṣṭambhadharmā smṛtir
jāyate yadi tadāpi tadanubhavabodho nānuvartate, yaś ca anekakālasthāyī bodhaḥ sa
evātmānanubhavitā (ĪPKVṛ 1.2.3).
6 saty āpi ātmani dṛṅnāśāt taddvārā dṛṣṭavastuṣu / smṛtiḥ kenātha (ĪPK 1.2.4). “Even
by accepting the existence of a self, memory is still not explained, for the perception no longer exists, and only through it memory has access to the objects formerly
perceived”.
7 evaṃ ātmasthairyeṇa kim anupayoginā saṃskārasyātmavāde ‘py aṅgīkaraṇāt tenaiva
ca siddheḥ (ĪPKVṛ 1.2.5). “If things are so, what is the point of postulating a useless
permanent subject? Even the supporter of the existence of the self accepts the existence
of a mental trace, and on the basis of this alone memory is established”.
8 anubhavāt saṃskāraḥ saṃskārāc ca smṛtir jāyamānā taṃ pūrvānubhavam anukurvaty
evāvagāhitaviṣayaṃ tam anubhavam ābhāsayati (ĪPKVṛ 1.2.5).

The Buddhist doctrine of non-self 37
9 This is a typically Vaiśeṣika line of reasoning. See Torella (2002, p. 92). Also see NSB
on NS 1.1.5.
10 On the problem of relation in Indian philosophy, see Dravid (1977).
11 smartā draṣṭeva kalpitaḥ. “The subject of memory is only a mental construct, as is
the subject of perception” (ĪPK 1.2.4). sukhaduḥkhajñānādibhinnadharmāśrayatven
āpi ātmano ‘nupayogo bhinnair dharmair asaṃbhinnasya anupajātaviśeṣasya smṛtāv
avyāpṛteḥ (ĪPKVṛ 1.2.6). “The self, even if intended as the basis for qualities that are
distinct from it, such as pleasure, pain, knowledge etc., is useless. Being unaffected by
modification, and being unrelated to those qualities that are distinct from it, it does not
perform any function in the phenomenon of memory”.
12 citsvābhāvye
jñānasya
cetyadharmadeśakālāveśayogād
ātmana
iva
nityatādiprasaṅgaḥ. jaḍatve katham arthasyāsau prakāśaḥ (ĪPKVṛ on 1.2.7). “If a
cognition were by nature conscious, the unwanted consequence would be that it would
become permanent etc. like the self, because it would be unable to be associated with
time and place, which are qualities pertaining to objects. But if it were not sentient,
how could it illuminate an object?”
13 evaṃ yadi citsvarūpaṃ jñānaṃ, tat nityavibhurūpaṃ tad apīti ātmāntaraṃ tad iti
jñānahetuḥ svarūpāsiddhaḥ (ĪPVV vol. 1. p. 134). “If a cognition were conscious,
it would be permanent and all-pervading, then it would be another self. But then [in
an inference] the cognition cannot be the inferential sign since its nature is not established”. This remark by Abhinavagupta explains why the Buddhists maintain that both
cognitions and self cannot be eternal. If it were so, one would treat cognition as another
self, with the same qualities. But in that case, one cannot any longer use the cognition
as an inferential sign to prove the existence of self.
14 athārthasya yathā rūpaṃ dhatte buddhis tathātmanaḥ caitanyam . . . (ĪPK 1.2.8). “Just
like the intellect assumes the form of the object, so it assumes the sentiency of the
self . . .”.
15 The ĪPKVṛ rounds this up by saying: tataḥ . . . jñātṛtvam kalpitam (ĪPKVṛ on 1.2.11).
“Therefore, the notion that the self is the knower is a mental construct”.

3

The true nature of
self-awareness

In the third and fourth sections of the ‘Chapter on Knowledge’, Utpaladeva stages
the refutation of the Buddhist position on memory and introduces some crucial
notions for his overall conception of knowledge and consciousness. His rebuttal of the account we have outlined in the previous chapter revolves around a
key idea. For him, a cognition is by nature self-conscious or self-revealing. The
idea is expressed in Sanskrit by terms like svasaṃvedana, ātmasaṃvedana, or
svasaṃvitti. However, and this is crucial, the very same belief is shared by the
Buddhists. Accordingly, Utpaladeva adopts a quasi-Socratic strategy that consists
in interpreting the notion so strictly that in the end, the Buddhists are faced with
two options: either ditch the idea that cognitions are self-conscious or accept the
existence of a subject. For the sake of clarity, I shall divide Utpaladeva’s arguments
into two different parts. First, I follow his discussion about the overall nature of
svasaṃvedana, which has a significant bearing on the way the Pratyabhijñā conceives consciousness itself. Then I focus on a series of more specific objections
Utpaladeva makes to the Buddhist account of memory. All his remarks revolve
around the fact that conceiving memory in terms of a succession of mental traces
is tantamount to imagine a series of cognitions that are the content of one another,
a position that for the Pratyabhijñā is untenable.1

Knowledge of knowledge: a variety of approaches
Before embarking on a discussion of the ‘knowledge of knowledge’, it is useful to
spend some words on the way Indian thinkers conceived knowledge itself. Different from Euro-American epistemology that tends to regard knowledge as a mental
disposition having the form of a true justified belief, Indian philosophers are practically univocal in considering it an episodic, instantaneous moment of awareness, whose truth-value is guaranteed by the application of appropriate epistemic
means. This implies that whenever Indian authors use words like ‘cognitions’ or
‘knowledge’ (thus using Sanskrit terms like jñāna, pratiti, or pratyaya), they have
in mind something close to the notion of ‘mental state’. We discuss the question
more in detail in Chapter 5. For the moment, it is sufficient to keep in mind that
in what follows, I am using the terms ‘cognition’, ‘knowledge’, ‘mental state’, or
‘mental awareness’ rather interchangeably.

The true nature of self-awareness

39

Returning to the question of the nature of the ‘knowledge of knowledge’, the
issue is a widely debated one in Indian philosophy, and by the time in which the
Pratyabhijñā peaked, the topic had long been a source of confrontation among
various traditions. In dealing with the issue, it is helpful to reconsider an explanatory model originally developed by B.K. Matilal (1986, pp. 141–179). The scheme
summarizes the way Indian philosophers conceived the problem of ‘knowledge of
knowledge’ in terms of contrasting propositions. There are essentially two main
theses facing each other:
T1: A cognition C1 grasps an object or an event and also itself.
T2: A cognition C1 grasps an object or an event, but in apprehending C1,
another cognition, C2, is necessary.
According to T1, a cognition apprehends the object and, concurrently, itself.
This practically means that when I see a red apple, I am automatically aware
of my seeing. In T2, on the other hand, a cognition requires another cognition
(parasaṃvedana) in order to be known. Returning to the previous example, if
I see a red apple, I am aware of the content of my awareness, but to become
aware that I am aware, a second-order cognition is required. T1 is endorsed by
the Buddhist of the Pramāṇavāda school and the Prābhākara school of Mīmāṃsā.
It goes without saying that while the Mīmāṃsakas recognize the existence of a
knowing subject in the process, the Buddhists do not. This means that for the followers of Prabhākara, T1 comes down to saying that when a knowing subject is
aware of something, she is necessarily aware of her own awareness. The ninth c.
Prābhākara philosopher Śālikanātha Miśra specified that in a cognitive event, one
apprehends the content of the cognition, the cognition itself and the knowing subject. The cognition is therefore regarded as a threefold event (tripuṭipratyakṣa).
In the case of the Buddhists, T1 simply means that a cognition is self-aware or
self-revealing. We shall discuss this position thoroughly in a moment.
T2 is the standard position of the exponents of the Nyāya school. These
­philosophers would argue that a cognition is normally followed by another
one. This ensuing cognition has the nature of an inner perceptual awareness
(anuvyavasāya, literally ‘subsequent determination’). A significantly different
interpretation of T2 is defended by the Bhāṭṭa Mīmāṃsakas. For the Bhāṭṭas, the
awareness of a given cognitive episode is actually determined by a second cognition. But different from the Naiyāyikas, they would contend that this second
cognition is not an inner perception but an inference. Their view is roughly the
following: when someone cognizes an object, this object assumes the property
of being known (jñatatā). On the grounds of this property, the subject infers
that an awareness has arisen in her. To put it differently: if I perceive a blue
lotus, from the fact that the blue lotus has been perceived (that is, it possesses
the property of being known), I am allowed to infer that an awareness has taken
place in me.
Now in Matilal’s scheme, this first dichotomy is accompanied by several others. For our purposes, it is sufficient to consider the very next one. The question

40

The true nature of self-awareness

is: when I cognize something, am I always necessarily aware of my awareness?
The next two theses offer two alternative views on the issue:
T3: Once a cognition C1 arises, it is necessarily conscious of itself.
T4: Once a cognition C1 arises, the fact that such a cognition is also self-aware
depends on contingent factors. In other words, it is not true that any cognitions is necessarily aware of itself. Some cognitions may arise without
being cognized.
T3 is defended by the Buddhists (who combine it with T1) and both denominations of Mīmāṃsā (the Bhāṭṭas accept it in combination with T2, the Prābhākaras
with T1) and the Vedāntins. T4 is defended by the Nyāya and, in a way we explore
more in depth in Chapters 4 and 5, by Bhartṛhari.
To sum up, over time Indian philosophers have accepted three different explanations of the awareness of a mental state. The first (T1) consists of claiming that
any cognition is self-aware, thus apprehending its content and itself at the same
time. The second (T2) is the position whereby a cognition is made aware by an
immediately following inner perception. The third (the Bhāṭṭa’s version of T2)
maintains that a cognition is known through inference: by perceiving the object,
one infers that a cognition has taken place.

Self-awareness in Dignāga’s and Dharmakīrti’s works
Despite the usual historical uncertainties, we are reasonably sure that the question of the knowledge of knowledge became philosophically relevant when it
was formalized by the Buddhist Pramāṇavādins, specifically by Dignāga in the
Pramāṇasamuccaya (PS).2 Besides noting other qualities of self-consciousness,3
there the author maintains that cognitions have a double nature, meaning that they
cognize at the same time both their content and themselves.4 To give an example,
for Dignāga, the cognition of a blue lotus implies both ‘the cognition of the blue
lotus’ and the ‘self-awareness of the cognition of the blue lotus’. This is always
true for all kinds of awareness. The Buddhist philosopher puts forward three different arguments in support of the claim. In the first place, he argues that if a
cognition were to possess just one nature—be it its own one (which he calls the
svābhāsa aspect) or the object one (the viṣayābhāsa one)—one would be forced
to abandon the ordinary distinction between ‘the cognition of a certain object’
and the ‘awareness that accompanies the cognition of that very object’.5 To better understand this point, consider the situation in which a cognition consisted of
its object-aspect only. In this case, the self-awareness that always accompanies
the cognition would come down to the cognition of the object. It would not be
in any way different from it. On the other hand, by supposing that a given cognition possesses only, the svābhāsa aspect, one would safeguard the self-awareness
of the cognition but of a cognition that is, so to speak, void, and which does not
apprehend any object.

The true nature of self-awareness

41

In the second place, if a mental awareness possessed just the svābhāsa nature,6 a
later cognition would be unable to illuminate the content of a former one, because
the content of the earlier cognition will be gone when the later takes place.7
In the third place, memory itself proves that cognitions have two forms: by
remembering something, we recollect both the former cognition and its content.
This also proves that cognitions are self-aware, since memory applies only to
what has already been known. If I remember that I perceived a blue lotus, this
means that the perception of the blue lotus has previously been cognized.8 It goes
without saying that one could explain the awareness of this perception differently,
that is, by arguing that the original perception is cognized by a second one, a
thesis which corresponds to T2 in Matilal’s scheme. Nonetheless, Dignāga rules
this possibility out for it would lead to infinite regress. To negate that cognitions
are self-aware requires the postulation of a second-order cognition to explain the
first, then a third to explain the second, and so on. Hence the conclusion, accepted
by the whole ensuing Buddhist tradition, is that any cognition necessarily reveals
both its content and itself.
Dignāga’s ideas were later expanded and refined by Dharmakīrti, his most influential follower. Rather than insisting on the impossibility to explain memory without
postulating the existence of higher-order cognitions, Dharmakīrti’s links his discussion with one of his most crucial epistemological tenets, according to which there is
no actual difference between a cognition and its content, both being the content of
a simultaneous perception.9 In this regard, Dharmakīrti claims that a cognition can
be cognized only by itself; to suppose that is revealed by another is unsound for at
least two reasons. First, one would end up in the rather bizarre situation in which
the object is not established at the time of perception—since the perception cognizing it is has not yet been established—but it is established at the moment of the
subsequent cognition, when the object has vanished. Second, one would again fall
into the infinite regress trap: postulating the existence of a second-order cognition
to account for the first requires a third-order one to explain the second and so forth.

Pratyabhijñā’s understanding of self-awareness
Pratyabhijñā’s discussion of svasaṃvedana is heavily influenced by the
Pramāṇavāda’s elaboration we have just examined. Nonetheless Utpaladeva
believes that the Buddhist account, though acceptable up to a certain point, is
eventually incorrect. As anticipated, the Śaivas aim to show that the way in which
the Buddhists conceive the notion of self-awareness is contradictory and that
cognitions’ self-revealing nature is actually a strong indication for the existence
of a self. Let us see how they back this claim and focus on Dignāga’s distinction between a content-directed aspect and a self-reflexive one. The Pratyabhijñā
authors have no problems in accepting the notion that a cognition and the awareness of its content occur simultaneously, but they emphasize that the two aspects
have a radically different nature. Śaivas’ attitude towards the question becomes
clear if we examine the definition of self-consciousness Abhinavagupta gives in

42

The true nature of self-awareness

commenting ĪPK 1.3.2. In the stanza, Utpaladeva is explicitly claiming that a
cognitive state is self-conscious (dṛk svābhāsaiva) and cannot be the object of
another. But what is most revealing is the explanation Abhinavagupta provides in
his commentary:
[In the verse] the word drś means “knowledge”. This knowledge differs from
what is inert, insofar as its nature consists only of illuminating itself. For
what is inert must be regarded as different from light. Hence, the expression
“a cognition is self-illuminating” (dṛk svābhāsa) means that: 1) the unfailing
nature of a cognition is the capacity to illuminate (prakāśamānatā); or that 2)
the proper nature of a cognition consists of illuminating itself.10
The heart of the matter is the interpretation of the Sanskrit compound svābhāsa,
‘self-revealing’, which Abhinavagupta understands in two different ways. In
the first place, he takes it as meaning that the own (sva) nature of a cognition
consists in illuminating (ābhāsa) something else, a definition that highlights
the intentional nature of a cognition, which is innately about something.11 On
the other hand, with the second interpretation—according to which the proper
nature of a cognition consists in illuminating (ābhāsa) only itself (sva)—Abhinavagupta emphasizes the fact that mental states have inevitably a reflexive
nature, too. Apparently, the Pratyabhijñā was thus reproducing the very same
dichotomy between the two aspects of svasaṃvedana the Pramāṇavādins had
already put forward. Still, there is a radical difference. The Śaivas in fact argue
that the Buddhists, though aware of the double nature of cognitions, end up
treating the two aspects in the same way, that is, they regard the purely selfreflexive aspect as if it were a content itself. Put another way, they accuse the
Pramāṇavādins of holding the view that a cognition is self-conscious but only in
the sense that its content corresponds to itself. But this, according to the Śaivas,
has nothing to do with the self-conscious nature of a cognition. As we are going
to see in detail in Chapters 5 and 6, the self-conscious nature of a cognition consists in the purely private, subjective, intention-free aspect of a mental state.12
Accordingly, the gist of Pratyabhijñā’s argumentation is that a mental episode is
not simply aware of itself as content but only of itself (as often, but not necessarily, having a content, an intention). Using a term the Śaivas often employ,
mental states are by nature ‘confined to themselves’, ātmaniṣṭḥa. Accordingly,
if the Buddhists define self-awareness in intentional terms, they will infringe
the axiom whereby a cognition can never be objectified by another. And this
will forbid them from explaining memory as a sequence of cognitions extended
over time. The Śaivas’ way out of the conundrum is to accept that, though the
svābhāsa and viṣayābhāsa aspects of a cognition always occur together and are
strictly related, they actually differ from one another. It is the svābhāsa aspect of
a mental state that can never be objectified by other cognitions, for it consists of
pure subjectivity or, as the Śaivas prefer to put it, of pure ‘wonder’ (camatkāra).
In the end, it is this purely subjective dimension that distinguishes a conscious
being from a non-conscious one.

The true nature of self-awareness

43

The Pratyabhijñā’s position becomes even more perspicuous if we recall the
discussion on the Exhaustiveness Principle outlined in the previous chapter. The
Buddha’s arguments against the notion of self were all based on the premise that
the five skandhas exhaust all human physical and mental experience. We have
already seen that the Exhaustiveness Principle can be put into question by arguing that the skandha-based account of experience leaves out the strong, intuitive
feeling of subjectivity we all get in dealing with our own mental (and physical)
states. As Siderits puts it, in the Buddhist view all that we have is a series of
physical and mental episodes that are connected as an unbroken flux on the basis
of a relationship of cause and effect. The point is that this stream of mental and
physical events seems to belong to nobody. This goes against the fact that we have
a strong phenomenal perception of subjectivity, of ‘I’ and ‘mine’. Pratyabhijñā’s
objections go precisely in that direction. They, of course, do not focus on the
rūpa, the physical skandha, but rather on the nāma ones, our mental experience.
According to the Śaivas, not only do the Buddhists leave the subjective dimension of all mental states out of the picture, but they also construe the emergence
of physical and mental events on the basis of a cause-and-effect relationship that
implies the objectification of cognitions. For them, the subjective, private aspect
of consciousness can never be the content of any activity of the mind.
After this main contention, the Pratyabhijñā intellectuals made a further step.
With a leap in the argument whose plausibility is discussed in Chapter 7, the
purely subjective aspect of a mental state—which is present in all cognitions and
therefore persists over time—is identified with the self, the subject of conscious
experience. That for the Pratyabhijñā there is an intimate relation between the
self-conscious nature of a mental state and the notion of self is clearly stated in a
reconstructed fragment of the Vivṛti:
It has therefore been proved that being conscious of itself [on the part of cognition] is pervaded by the light of the I, which is opposed to insentience—and
insentience for its part, has the nature of “this”, which pervades the property
of being knowable by others. Thus it is possible to deny that a cognition is
knowable by other [cognition], because this property is pervaded by another
that is in opposition to the pervading one.
(Torella, 1992, p. 337)13
Here Utpaladeva is giving a logical flavour to the idea we have been discussing
at length. He claims that between self-awareness of cognitions and the ‘I’ (i.e. the
self), there is an invariable concomitance (vyāpti), meaning that whenever there
is self-awareness, one must surmise the existence of self. The same is true with
regard to insentient beings and the notion of objectivity (idantā). If all this is posited, claiming that a cognition can be the object of something else would lead to
the fallacy of attributing to self-awareness a property (i.e. insentience) that is in
contradiction with the pervading one (vyāpaka), that is, the sentiency of the self.
It remains to see how the Śaivas apply their restrictive conception of
svasaṃvedana to the specific case of memory.14 Their main idea is that, being

44

The true nature of self-awareness

unable to escape the predicament of objectified cognitions, the Buddhist description of memory is untenable.

The nature of memory
In the previous chapter, we saw that the Buddhists conceive memory as the last
cognition of a series of mental events starting with a mental episode taking place
in the past. Their argument is that the mental traces—saṃskāras—left by subsequent cognitions bridge the temporal gap separating the original perception from
the later recollection. For the Pratyabhijñā thinkers, the problem with this view is
that saṃskāras cannot be but cognitions. Accordingly, to explain memory through
a series of mental traces is tantamount to assuming a series of cognitions that are
one the content of another.15 In the ĪPV, Utpaladeva makes a rhetorical attempt
to save the credibility of the opponents’ position. He affirms that the only way to
keep the mental traces in the picture is to imagine that samṣkāras guarantee just
the similarity between the former perception and the memory happening later.16
Nevertheless the idea is short-lived and does not stand a further analysis: memory
cannot really establish a resemblance without accessing the content of the former
cognition, something that is, as we have seen, impossible.17
Once established that the samṣkāra model is implausible, Utpaladeva stages a
further counter-objection which he draws from the Buddhist side itself and which
is strictly related to the latter’s epistemological presuppositions. The Buddhists
may try to escape the criticism of the samṣkāra scheme by questioning the epistemic status of memory itself. They may contend that what we call memory is
a form of conceptual knowledge that appears to have as its content the former
perception but actually has not.18 Accordingly, the Buddhists could claim that
there is nothing real involved in the process of memory. In the end, memory is
just another case of determinative knowledge, hence a conceptual construction
lacking veridicality. Utpaladeva’s reply to this move calls attention to the fact
that reducing memory to the status of conceptual fabrication is dangerous. It is
dangerous for the specific issue under discussion, for it would be a definitive blow
to the Buddhist idea that saṃskāras play a role in the process of memory.19 But it
is even more dangerous on a general level, because it would imply that most of
our knowledge—which for the Pratyabhijñā ultimately depends on the capacity
of unifying cognitions through time, hence largely on memory—is essentially
defective.
“How can memory derive from error? And what about the establishment of
objects? And if such is the case, what is the point of requiring a dependence on the
mental traces left by the earlier perception?”20
Besides these two general objections, Utpaladeva points out further inconsistencies in the Buddhist view, especially in the last part of the third section
of the ‘Chapter on Knowledge’, as well as in the corresponding Vṛtti. The first
counterargument stresses that one is not even allowed to affirm that memory
is determinative knowledge. Actually, if the content of the original perception
disappears immediately after the perception, as the Buddhist would maintain,

The true nature of self-awareness

45

then the former cognition would not appear in memory anymore.21 In the second
place, memory cannot be explained away by saying that it is an erroneous cognition. This is incorrect because, on the basis of a notion largely accepted by Indian
thinkers, one can establish the truth-value of first cognitions only. Being memory
a subsequent cognition it cannot be false or true in itself.22 In the third place, the
way human activity works presupposes the existence of memory.23 And, in the
fourth place, determinative knowledge cannot by itself explain memory, for it
is unable to cognize external objects. In fact, there are just two possibilities: if
determinative knowledge is erroneous, then it is unconscious, but how can one
establish an object on the basis of unconscious cognitions? On the other hand,
if determinative knowledge is not erroneous but conscious, it will nevertheless
remain a cognition. And as we have learned, a cognition is self-confined and
self-aware but, so to say, unable to go beyond itself and apprehend any external
content.24
Let us finally illustrate how the Pratyabhijñā’s explain the process of memory.
To describe it, Utpaladeva introduces two key ideas that will play a huge role
in our ensuing discussion. The author makes his case by building on a distinction between the cognition of the object that happens in the past (prakāśa) and
a reflective awareness (vimarśa) that apparently sets in later, at the moment of
recollection. However, these two aspects are partially identical because they share
the subjective dimension that characterize all mental states. This aspect, which is
ultimately identified with self and consciousness, is that which bridges the gap
between the two moments of recollection.25 The point is clearly stated in a passage
of the ĪPKVṛ:
In memory the perceived object that is remembered is manifested as separate,
but that is not the case of perception. This is because it is the self itself that is
manifested—the object of the notion of “I”—whose nature is informed by the
perception. And it is precisely this reality occurring at many different times,
known as “I”, that is the self.26
Mental states possess a double nature, having both a self-conscious aspect and
an intentional one; it is the self-conscious aspect of self-awareness the one that
persists over time. This is also clear from Abhinavagupta’s interpretation of
­Utpaladeva’s verse.27 According to him, cognitions have an objective aspect
(arthāṃśa) which is self-confined, always restricted to the past, and absolutely
inaccessible to any subsequent cognition. Once occurred and vanished, this part
is gone forever. If the original cognition were just made up of it, memory (and
knowledge as well) would never occur and no explanation—be it samṣkāras,
intellect, etc.—could account for it. But there is another aspect, which is purely
subjective and which ­Abhinavagupta calls the “consciousness-part” (svātmāṃśa).
This part is not affected by time and is perpetual; it guarantees the continuity,
and using a crucial term of the school, the dynamic unification (anusaṃdhāna) of
cognitions: it corresponds to vimarśa and is the paramount characteristic of self
and consciousness. One must be careful in noting the difference with the Buddhist

46

The true nature of self-awareness

position: vimarśa does not have the former cognition as its object. It is the former
cognition, precisely its svātma part.
By following this approach, Utpaladeva claims to have explained memory without infringing the axiom of non-objectivization of cognitions. But, most important
for us, he has also laid the foundation of an advanced picture of consciousness.
By distinguishing the subjective aspect of awareness from the objective one,
Utpaladeva argues that consciousness’s most intimate nature lies in the subjective, private dimension of a mental state, a position that is close to some of the
latest developments in contemporary philosophy of mind. The Śaivas also believe
that this subjective dimension forms the kernel of personhood, the real existence
of which they are so keen to assert. In Chapter 5 we shall see how they will further argue that consciousness has an intrinsically linguistic nature. But before
going into that, it is worth considering the possible influence of earlier philosophies on the Pratyabhijñā’s discussion of svasaṃvedana. Were Utpaladeva and
Abhinavagupta aware of earlier interpretations of the notion? Are there plausible
antecedents to their extensive application of the axiom of non-objectification of
cognitions? In the next chapter, we briefly consider a different Buddhist view on
the issue, displayed in the works of Śāntarakṣita and his commentator Kamalaśīla.
Then we will discuss at length Bhartṛhari’s contributions to the question.

Notes
1 satyaṃ kiṃtu smṛtijñānaṃ pūrvānubhavasaṃskṛteḥ/jātam apy ātmaniṣṭhaṃ tan
nādyanubhavavedakam // (ĪPK 1.3.1). “True. However, that kind of cognition which is
memory, though arising from the mental traces left by the former perception, is restricted
to itself and does not know the original perception”. na tu pūrvānubhavāveśābhāvāt
pūrvānubhūtārthavyavasthāpikā ghaṭate (ĪPKVṛ on 1.3.1). “Memory cannot determine the object formerly perceived, since it [memory] does not penetrate the former
direct perception”.
2 Zhihua Yao has reconstructed the historical evolution of the problem in Buddhist sources,
discussing also the contribution of some pre-Dignāga’s thinkers. See Yao (2005).
3 Dignāga claims that cognition’s self-awareness has a non-conceptual nature, being a
form of perception. This means that in the Pramāṇavāda framework, svasaṃvedana
is a rightful means to acquire knowledge, exactly in the way standard, sense-based
perceptions are. Dignāga also adds that to have a non-conceptualized cognition of
conceptualized knowledge is absolutely legitimate, for a cognition may be conceptualized as far as its content is concerned, but its self-awareness will remain perceptual
and non-conceptualized. See PS 1.6ab mānasaṃ cārtharāgādisvasaṃvittir akalpikā /
“and the self-awareness of objects or feelings and so on is non-conceptual, and it is a
form of mental [perception]”. See also PS 1.7ab: kalpanāpi svasaṃvittāv iṣṭā nārthe
vikalpanāt // “Even conceptual knowledge is to be accepted [as a perception] when it is
directed at itself. However, this is not the case when it is directed at an object, because
there is a conceptualization [of the object]”. PSV adds: atra viṣaye rāgādivad eva
apratyakṣatve ‘pi svaṃ saṃvittīti na doṣaḥ. “There is no mistake [at all in claiming that
even] in the case of a content that is not grasped by a direct perception, such as feelings
etc., there is self-awareness”.
4 See PS 1.11 ab: viṣayajñānatajjñānaviśeṣāt tu dvirupatā / “[A cognition] has a double
nature, because there is a difference between the apprehension of the object and the
apprehension of that [cognition of the object]”.

The true nature of self-awareness

47

5 See PSV on 1.11 ab: anyathā yadi viṣayānurūpam eva viṣayajñānaṃ syāt svarūpaṃ
vā, jñānajñānam api viṣayajñānenāviśiṣṭaṃ syāt. “Otherwise, if the cognition of an
object were to represent either its content or its own form only, then there would be no
difference between the cognition of a cognition and the cognition of an object”. For a
discussion of this passage, see Kellner (2010, pp. 211–213).
6 Relying on Jinendrabuddhi’s commentary, Birgit Kellner specifies that in this passage,
Dignāga is referring to a cognition lacking a content. See Kellner (2010, p. 210).
7 See PSV on 1.11ab: na cottarāṇi jñānāni pūrvaviprakṛṣṭaviṣayābhāsāni syuḥ,
tasyāviṣayātvāt. ataś ca siddhaṃ dvairūpyaṃ jñānasya. “Moreover [if a cognition
were to consist of the viṣaya aspect only], then later cognitions would not make manifest objects that are remote from them in time, because they would lack a content.
Therefore, the double nature of knowledge is established”.
8 See PSV on 1.11ab: yasmāc cānubhavottarakālaṃ viṣaya iva jṇāne ‘pi, yasmāc
cānubhavottarakālaṃ viṣaya iva jñāne ‘pi smṛtir utpadyate, tasmād asti dvirūpatā
jñānasya svasaṃvedyatā ca. “Since memory arises in a moment that follows that of
the perception, [and arises] for the content and the cognition as well, hence a cognition
has two forms and a self-cognizing nature”.
9 See PVin 1.54ab: sahopalambhaniyamād abhedo nīlataddhiyoḥ. “There is no difference between ‘blue’ and the ‘cognition of blue’, since the two are necessarily perceived
together”.
10 ‘dṛk’ jñānam, tac ca jaḍāt vibhidyate svaprakāśaikarūpatayā, jaḍo hi prakāśāt
pṛthagbhūto vaktavyaḥ, tena dṛk svābhāsā, ābhāsaḥ prakāśamānatā sā svaṃ rūpam
avyabhicāri yasyāḥ, svasya ca ābhāsanaṃ rūpaṃ yasyāḥ.
11 The point is further corroborated by Bhāskara Kaṇṭha’s commentary on the ĪPV in
which Abhinavagupta’s prakāśamānatā is glossed as bāhyasaṃbandhiprakāśakartṛ
tva, loosely meaning “the capacity of being a knowing, illuminating agent in relation
to external objects”. See ĪPV vol. 1, p. 126.
12 saty api bāhye taccharīrasaṃkrāntaṃ na prakāśanaṃ jñānasya rūpaṃ bhavitum
arhati, paraprakāśanātmakanijarūpaprakāśanam eva hi svaprakāśatvaṃ jñānasya
bhaṇyate (ĪPV on ĪPK 1.3.2). “Even admitting the existence of external objects, a light
which is reflected on the material aspects [of external things] cannot be the proper
nature of a cognition, because we maintain that the self-illuminating nature of a cognition is no more than the illumination of its own nature, in the form of the illumination
of a different [external] thing”.
13 siddhaṃ tāvat parasaṃvedyatāvyāpakedantāsvabhāva—jaḍatāviruddhāhaṃprakāśa—
vyaptatvaṃ svasaṃvidrūpatasya. tena jñāne vyāpakaviruddhavyāptāyāḥ para—
saṃvedyatāyā niṣedhaḥ.
14 It is worth noting that the svasaṃvedana argument is by no means restricted to the
discussion of memory. Let us consider two further cases. The first concerns the analysis of the so-called invalidated–invalidating relation (bādhyabādhakabhāva), which
obtains between two cognitions in the case of wrong judgements, specifically when a
previous false cognition is invalidated by a later, correct one. Standard examples are
those of the perception of silver instead of mother of pearl or of a snake in place of
a rope. The issue at stake is to explain what sort of relationship exists between these
cognitions. Utpaladeva considers the case in which one sees a surface and realizes that
it is devoid of a certain object—a jar, for instance. This is again a case of anupalabdhi
or ‘non-perception’. According to the Buddhists, the mere perception of the absence
of a jar is enough to prove that the surface is empty: a later correct perception would
in fact negate the validity of the former one, just like the cognition of the mother
of pearl wipes out that of silver. But for the Pratyabhijñā authors, the argument is
unsound. They believe that the Buddhists are confusing two different ways of conceiving non-existence, an absolute one (tādātmyābhāva), in which the contents of the
two cognitions (the invalidated—invalidating ones) are identical (the case of silver
and mother of pearl) and a relative one (vyatirekābhāva) in which the contents differ.

48

The true nature of self-awareness

The Buddhist contention that the mere perception of mother of pearl invalidates the
perception of silver is valid as far the tādātmyābhāva is concerned, but it does not
hold for the vyatirekābhāva. According to Utpaladeva, the non-existence of an object
on a certain surface is precisely an instance of vyatirekābhāva, and therefore it cannot be accounted for on the basis of a subsequent true cognition. It is evident that the
Śaiva is again resorting to the idea that cognitions are self-revealing and self-confined.
A surface and a hypothetical pot that may or may not be placed on it are the contents
of two unrelated cognitions, which can be connected only by admitting the unifying
activity of a knowing subject. The second case is more metaphysically oriented and
regards the possibility of imposing unity over multiplicity. This topic—discussed in
the second āhnika of the ‘Chapter on Action’ (kriyādhikāra)—is of a broader significance, since it comes down to the question whether ‘metaphysical’ notions—such as
those of action, relation, time etc.—are legitimate. As we have seen, the Buddhists
neatly refute this possibility by arguing that reality is made up of absolutely discrete
and ever-changing components. In their view, any attempt to reify this state of affairs
produces conceptualized notions, vikalpas, which although have some practical use,
are also inevitably mistaken. As expected, the Śaivas claim the opposite. According
to Utpaladeva, metaphysical ideas are legitimate, and they are so for two main reasons: they are “permanent and useful” (sthairyopayoga, see ĪPK 2.2.1). Let us focus
on the first aspect. Here ‘permanence’ has an epistemological connotation, somehow
connected to the bādhyabhādaka relationship we have discussed earlier. It means that
the notion of, say, ‘action’ is never set aside by a later cognition, and thus it remains
valid over time. In the ĪPV, Abhinavagupta makes clear that there is a substantial difference between the cognition of a certain action, such as ‘Caitra is going’, and that of
‘seeing two moons’, which takes place in erroneous judgements. The latter is in fact
invalidated by a subsequent perception, while that is not the case for the former. The
decisive argument is again the idea that a cognition is self-contained and impossible to
be objectified: the Śaivas could even go as far as accepting that the notion of action is a
vikalpa (i.e., a reification of a series of instantaneous movements in space and time that
are actually independent from one another), but this would not change the fact that this
vikalpa is in the end a cognition and as such self-restricted and unable to go beyond
itself like all other cognitions. How then to explain the persistence over time of metaphysical ideas, whose phenomenological appearance is so hard to deny? Again, this is
done by accepting the existence of a conscious subject who unifies the cognitions.
15 smṛtijñānam iti smṛtirūpaṃ jñānaṃ pūrvānubhavasaṃskārāt yady api jātaṃ tathāpi
ātmani svarūpe niṣṭhā viśrāntir yasya tādṛśam, na tu ādyasya anubhavasya jñāpakaṃ,
tat bhavati. na hi tat tena saha ātmānaṃ miśrayati (ĪPVV vol. I, p. 209). “Memory is
a cognition having the form of a recollection; even if it is born out of the mental traces
left by the original cognition, nevertheless it is such that the completion of its activity is
confined to itself, to its own nature, and is therefore unable to make the original cognition known. Because this [memory] never mixes itself up with that [original cognition]”.
16 dṛksvābhāsaiva nānyena vedyā rūpadṛśeva dṛk/rase saṃskārajatvaṃ tu tattulyatvaṃ
na tadgatiḥ // (ĪPK 1.3.2). “A cognition is self-revealing and cannot be known by
another cognition, just as the cognition of taste is not known by that of shape. The fact
that memory arises from mental traces implies its similarity to the earlier perception,
but not the cognition of that”. The idea is then expanded in the corresponding ĪPKVṛ:
pūrvānubhavasaṃskārajatvena tatsādṛśyamātraṃ na tu pūrvānubhavāvagatiḥ. “Since
memory arises from the mental traces left by the earlier perception, there is just a similarity to that perception but not a direct cognition of the latter”.
17 tadabhāvāt tatsādṛśyam api nāvaseyam (ĪPKVṛ on 1.3.2). “Since there is no cognition
of this former perception, not even a similarity to it can be maintained”.
18 athā tadviṣayatve ‘pi smṛtes tadavasāyataḥ / dṛṣṭālambanatā bhrāntyā tad etad asamañjasam // (ĪPK 1.3.3). “One may object that believing that memory is based on

The true nature of self-awareness

49

something perceived is an error; it is indeed a determinative cognition of a thing, even
if this thing has never really been cognized. However, this is wrong, too”.
19 pūrvānubhavāsparśe ca tadbhinnayogakṣemāyā bhrānteḥ saṃskārajātve ko grahaḥ
(ĪPKVṛ 1.3.4). “And, moreover, why insist so much on the fact that memory—conceived of as error—arises from the mental traces, when it is unrelated to the former
direct perception in every respect, not coming into contact with it in any way?”
20 smṛtitaiva kathaṃ tāvad bhrānteś cārthasthitiḥ kathaṃ/pūrvānubhavasaṃskārāpekṣā
ca kim itīṣyate // (ĪPK 1.3.4).
21 pūrvānubhavāprakāśāt tadviṣayasaṃpramoṣe ‘dhyavasāyamātrāt smṛtitvaṃ na yuktam (ĪPKVṛ on 1.3.4). “It is incorrect to hold that memory derives only from determinative knowledge, the object of the original perception being absent. This is because
the original perception is not manifested”.
22 Torella refers to the discussion contained in ĪPVV; see Torella (2001, p. 101). See also
Kataoka (2003) and Chatterjee (1979).
23 evam anyonyabhinnānām aparasparavedinām / jñānānām anusaṃdhānajanmā naśyej
janasthitiḥ // (ĪPK 1.3.6). “In this way, the human world, which is based on the unification of cognitions that are mutually diverse and unable of cognizing one another,
would be destroyed”.
24 bhrāntitve cāvasāyasya na jaḍād viṣayasthitiḥ / tato ‘jāḍye nijollekhaniṣṭhān
nārthasthitis tataḥ (ĪPK 1.3.5). “If determinative knowledge is an error, one cannot
establish an object on the basis of something inert. If it is instead conscious, there is
no establishment of the object in any case, because [such a determinative knowledge]
would be restricted to its own manifestation”.
25 sa hi pūrvānubhūtārthopalabdhā parato ‘pi san / vimṛśan sa iti svairī
smaratītyapadiśyate // (ĪPK 1.4.1). “The Free One, the one who grasps the objects formerly perceived, and who also continues to exist later, it has the reflective awareness:
‘that’. That is what is called remembering”.
26 ĪPKVṛ on 1.4.4: smṛtau smaryamāṇo ‘nubhūtārtho yathā pṛthagbhūto bhāti na
tathānubhavaḥ svātmana evāhantāpratyeyasyānubhuvamayatvena prathanāt, yaś
cānekakālo ‘haṃvedyo ‘rthaḥ sa evātmā.
27 See ĪPVV, vol. 2, p. 32.

4

Self-awareness
Pratyabhijñā’s forerunners

Pratyabhijñā’s strategy to dismiss the notion of nairātmyavāda is to give a very
strict interpretation to the idea that a knowledge episode is inherently able to cognize itself. The gist of the Śaiva argumentation is that the Buddhist epistemologists, although they themselves support the idea, are actually giving to the concept
an erroneous, intentional connotation. For them, a cognition is self-reflexive insofar as it is able to make itself the content of its own knowledge. This is precisely
the point Utpaladeva rejects. He rather argues that there is a factor in any mental
state that can never be reduced to objectivity. A contemporary philosopher would
characterize this view by saying that mental states have a component that is not
third person knowable but which is accessible only to the subject of experience.
Put another way, a mental state possesses a ‘what is like to be’ dimension that is
intention free and cannot be the content of other mental states. The existence of
this purely subjective element is for the Śaiva thinkers the most powerful indication that the notion of subjectivity is true and that, in the end, self and personhood
are real things. The Pratyabhijñā thinkers were probably not the first intellectuals
to have highlighted the presence of a subjective aspect in consciousness, but they
were certainly the most committed to putting the notion at the forefront of their
philosophy. There are nevertheless two contributions prior to Pratyabhijñā’s time
that are worth considering in some detail, as they may have had an influence on
the Śaivas’ elaboration. The first is that of the Buddhist thinker Śāntarakṣita and
his commentator Kamalaśīla, who envisaged a conception of self-reflexivity that
is in several respects similar to that of the Pratyabhijñā. Both authors lived in the
eighth c. CE and belonged to the so-called Madhyamaka-Yogācāra school, which
aimed, as the name betrays, at conciliating the Madhyamaka stance with the idealistic, mind-only approach of the Yogācāra.1 The second contribution to take into
account is that of Bhartṛhari, who probably was the earliest thinker to explicitly
state that a cognition is self-reflexive and can never be objectified by another.

A different Buddhist approach: Śāntarakṣita and
Kamalaśīla’s conception of svasaṃvedana
Although Dignāga and Dharmakīrti’s influence on the conception of svasaṃvedana
is profound, their interpretation of the notion is by no means unique in the history

Self-awareness

51

of Buddhist thought. A quite different understanding is found in the work of
Śāntarakṣita and his pupil Kamalaśīla. Śāntarakṣita’s conception of svasaṃvedana
has been the object of a thorough study by Paul Williams (1998), which has
contrasted his ideas on the question with those of previous Buddhist thinkers.
­Williams claims that over time, Buddhist philosophers have developed two different notions of reflexive awareness. In some cases, self-awareness is regarded as
having an intentional connotation. The idea behind this approach is that a cognitive episode is at the same time aware of itself, as well as of the content at which
it is directed. In this intentional understanding, a cognition “in some sense takes
an object, and in some sense that object is itself” (Williams, 1998, pp. 20–21). The
beginning of this interpretation is traceable to Dignāga’s argument from memory
that we have briefly discussed in Chapter 3. The argument boils down to the fact
that if I am able to remember something from the past, it is only because I can
recollect both the content of the original cognition and the cognition itself. For
instance, if I remember that I saw a blue thing yesterday, I must have both the
memory of blue and that of seeing blue; otherwise, the content ‘blue’ would not
be remembered at all. In Williams’s words:
The argument is, therefore, an argument for two elements in the original experience irreducible to each other. There is an eye-consciousness of
blue and there is another element in the consciousness experience which
is taking that eye-consciousness of blue as an object. This is shown by the
two elements in the recollection. One can remember that one experienced
blue because one not only experienced blue but also knew that one experienced blue. If a person did not know that he or she experienced blue,
then how could that person remember experiencing blue, and therefore
remember blue?
(Williams, 1998, p. 10)
Still, there is a second and rather different type of self-awareness, which
­Williams labels “reflexive self-awareness”, and which is indeed the one that
emerges in the Madhyamaka-Yogācāra tradition. Śāntarakṣita’s discussion of
self-awareness in mostly contained in a single chapter of his encyclopedic
Tattvasaṃgraha (TS), more precisely in a section dedicated to exploring the
ontological nature of external objects (bahirarthaparikṣā).2 The question is
further addressed in a couple of stanzas of another work of Śāntarakṣita, the
Madhyamakālaṃkāra (MA). In the TS, the analysis of svasaṃvedana takes
place in a context in which the author is defending the Dharmakīrtean notion
whereby the difference between the content of a cognition and cognition itself
is actually fictitious.3 The main reason why Śāntarakṣita embarked on a discussion and a defense of self-­awareness is that in the period intervening between
Dharmakīrti and himself, the idea had heavily been criticized by Brahmanical traditions, in particular the Bhaṭṭa Mīmāṃsā, whose positions Śāntarakṣita
illustrates here by extensively quoting Kumārila’s Ślokavārttika (ŚV).4 In refuting Brahmanical criticism, Śāntarakṣita applies both the infinite regress and the

52

Self-awareness

memory arguments we have appreciated in Dignāga’s and Dharmakīrti’s work.5
However, he also considers two further characteristics of self-awareness that
the Buddhist epistemologists did not take into account, at least explicitly. The
first is that self-awareness is not determined by other cognitions. With regard
to this, Śāntarakṣita says: “This is the meaning of self-awareness: it is something that cannot be but cognized and that in order to reveal its own form does
not require any other knowing entity”.6 Then he attributes to self-awareness a
second, novel property, by stating that it is the hallmark of conscious beings:
“Cognition manifests itself as different from inert entities. This self-awareness
of cognition consists precisely in being conscious”.7 The very same ideas are
spelled out, somewhat even more clearly, in two consecutive verses of the MA:
“Self-cognizing cognition is not an entity which [exists as] agent and action
[with its object] because it would be incorrect for consciousness, which is of
a single, partless nature, to be three (i.e., knower, knowing, and known)” (MA
17) and: “Consciousness is produced in the opposite way from that which is
of an inanimate nature. That which is not the nature of being inanimate is the
self-knowledge of this [consciousness]” (MA 16; both verses are translated in
Blumenthal, 2004, p. 237). As Williams remarks, in the reflexive type of selfawareness, “consciousness is self-referring in a non-objectifying way, just as
a lamp illuminates itself not as one object among others to be illuminated, but
through the very act of being a lamp, an illuminator of others” (Williams, 1998,
p. 20). Accordingly, svasaṃvedana is intended here as pure reflexivity, as what
makes consciousness what it is. MA 17 makes explicit that this second type of
self-reflexivity does not involve a subject–object relationship, and it does not
posit the existence of anything different from itself. In Śāntarakṣita’s view, the
reflexive nature of self-awareness is a datum, it is not something that can be
proven or argued for, as it is perfectly evident even to the man in the street.8 In
sum, without reflexive self-awareness, consciousness would not be consciousness at all.9 It is quite clear that this conception easily leads to an idealistic outcome. As Williams shows, the fact that there are an intentional and a reflexive
kind of svasaṃvedana does not mean that one cannot be reduced to the other.
For instance, for a follower of the Yogācāra tradition, the intentional aspect of
self-awareness coincides with the reflexive one. In the end, if there is no external objective aspect to cognize, pure consciousness cannot but cognize itself.
If self-awareness is the hallmark of consciousness only, then things that exist
outside consciousness cannot be cognized at all.
All this bears a strong resemblance to the positions of the Pratyabhijñā and
clearly shows that also the Buddhists were aware of the fact that consciousness
has a key aspect which is purely reflexive and impossible to objectify. Of course,
neither Śāntarakṣita nor Kamalaśīla concluded that pure consciousness is actually
nothing but the self, as the Śaiva thinkers would argue. Therefore, if we want to
appreciate a stance that is even closer to that of Utpaladeva, we must turn to the
work of Bhartṛhari, probably the first Indian thinker to highlight the crucial role
of the subjective dimension of consciousness.

Self-awareness

53

Bhartṛhari on svasaṃvedana: the Jātisamuddeśa section
In the monograph we just discussed, Williams also suggests that the notion of
‘reflexive self-awareness’ could have been an innovation of the MadhyamakaYogācāra school, perhaps under the influence of Dharmakīrti’s thought: “The idea
of portraying self-awareness as the quality of consciousness understood as the
reverse of insentience (bems po) may well have originated with Śāntarakṣita”
(Williams, 1998, p. 25). Actually, this can hardly be the case. Although the fact
has admittedly been overlooked, one of the earliest South Asian thinkers to argue
explicitly for the self-luminous nature of knowledge—and, consequently, to claim
that a cognition cannot be the content of another—was Bhartṛhari. Bhartṛhari
concentrated his most decisive statements on the nature of svasaṃvedana at the
very end of the Jātisamuddeśa, a subsection of VP’s third chapter dedicated to
analyzing competing views on the existence of universals. By drawing the section to a close, Bhartṛhari is faced with the need to offer an alternative theory to
the ­Buddhist ontological standpoint whereby objects and cognitions are singular
events. He renders such a position (in VP 3.3.101) by saying that if things and
cognitions appear to be somewhat similar, it is not because they are really so but
because of a mental fabrication that is devoid of real existence. The VP’s commentator Helārāja elaborates on this by affirming that according to the Buddhists,
a unitary cognition is impossible due to cognitions’ intrinsic singularity. This view
is then further spelled out by stating that if a conceptualized notion arises, this basically depends on the impossibility to express through language the absolute, radical difference that exists between things and events. Immediately after, Helārāja
introduces the view of those who disagree with the aforementioned position but
argue for the existence of real universals. In VP 3.1.104, Bhartṛhari calls them the
supporters of the “connection theory” (saṃsargadarśana). This standpoint is then
expanded and thoroughly analyzed, as if it was Bhartṛhari’s siddhānta, in four
crucial verses: VP 3.1.105–106 and 3.1.109–110. Given the importance of the
whole passage for establishing Bhartṛhari’s view on svasaṃvedana, I have translated it in its entirety in the appendix, together with Helārāja’s commentary thereupon. The gist of Bhartṛhari’s reasoning can nevertheless summarized as follows.
The starting point of the discussion is common experience. In ordinary life,
everyone is able to notice that some cognitions are identical to others. Now, is
such an identity based on a common feature, a universal that is instantiated within
the various cognitions or not? For Bhartṛhari, the answer is a definite no. There is
certainly a common element between cognitions, but it is not intrinsic to cognitions as such; rather, it pertains to their contents: “The universal resides only in
the content of a cognition and is subsidiary to cognitions. A cognition is never
represented by another form, differently from what happens in the case of its
content”.10 As Helārāja explains, the main difference between the content of a
cognition (a pot, a patch of blue, the action ‘running’, etc.) and the cognition
itself lies in the fact that the former is explainable in terms of universal features, whereas for the latter, such a representation is impossible.11 In the case of

54

Self-awareness

contents, a common element is in fact identified by cognitions themselves. But
in the case of cognitions, what is going to identify a common element? Certainly
not another cognition; otherwise, infinite regress would set in. The only property
cognitions share is their conscious nature (saṃvidākāra), but such a conscious
nature cannot be cognized by another cognition, for that would mean treating a
cognition as a content, thus contradicting its nature. The fact that we can perceive
a similarity between cognitive states depends on the capacity cognitions have
to reflect or assume the universals of their contents.12 Next, Bhartṛhari expands
on the reason why a cognition is never objectified by another. He brings in the
example of light. Like a source of light is never illuminated by another, similarly,
a cognition is never cognized by another: “Just as a light is never illuminated by
another light, similarly what has the form of a cognition cannot be apprehended
by another cognition”.13 Helārāja adds further information by specifying that a
cognition is always self-revealing, and this constitutes the distinguishing mark of
living beings.14 Moreover, he says that a cognition is always perceived at the time
of the cognition of its content; otherwise, one would need a second-order cognition to explain the first and so forth.15 Then it is affirmed that ‘the cognition of x’ is
quite a different thing from ‘the cognition of the cognition of x’. Bhartṛhari states
that this difference is caused by the fact that ‘the cognition of x’ comes down to
the content, meaning that the cognition of x is produced directly by the external
object, whereas this is not the case for ‘the cognition of the cognition of x’: “The
cognition ‘this is the cognition of a pot’ is different from the cognition of the pot.
The cognition of the pot comes down to the external object”.16 In the commentary,
Helārāja gives four reasons to explain the difference between these two kinds of
cognitions. For the sake of clarity, let us call C1 ‘the cognition of x’ and C2 ‘the
cognition of the cognition of x’, where x is an external object, for instance, a pot.
In Helārāja’s first interpretation, the pot in C1 has different characteristics from
the pot in C2: the pot in C1 is produced directly from the content, the one in C2
only indirectly. This means that the two are not similar, and a relationship of
‘apprehender and apprehended’ cannot be established, since such a relationship
requires similarity. The conclusion is that C2 does not cognize C1.17 In the second interpretation, C2 must necessarily have a content, for a cognition without a
content is unthinkable. The content is clearly the same of C1, that is, the pot. The
conclusion is again that C2 does not cognize C1; it is directly cognizing the pot.18
In the third interpretation, C1 cannot cognize a pot and be cognized at the same
time by C2, for in this case, the distinction between an apprehender subject and
an apprehended content would vanish and with it any possibility of dependable
knowledge. Again, the conclusion is that C2 does not cognize C1.19 Finally, in
the fourth interpretation, C2 can at the most recognize C1 as some form of cognition, but it cannot cognize the conscious nature of C1. Helārāja gives the telling
example of someone trying to access the cognition of someone else: one can
certainly cognize the same content of the cognition of another person but cannot
cognize it in the same way as that person. Therefore, C2 does not cognize C1, and
the objectification of a cognition is always inadmissible.20 Finally, the last stanza,
VP 3.1.110, is meant to meet a final criticism of the pūrvapakṣin, which seeks to

Self-awareness

55

identify the cognition with its content. If a cognition and its content are the same,
then one is allowed to claim that cognitions are able to assume themselves as their
own content. In the stanza, Bhartṛhari refutes this view by conceding that a cognition is certainly always intentional, that is to say, it is never devoid of a content,
but also emphasizing that between cognitions and contents, there is, however, a
substantial difference. According to him, whenever we suppose that a cognition
x is having another cognition y as its content, we are just cognizing the universal
represented in x, which is generated by the content of y.21 Helārāja expands on this
idea by stressing that ‘cognitions of cognitions’ are always rooted in the original
object: if a cognition appears to be the content of another, it is just a temporary
occurrence, as it happens in the case of a crystal assuming a certain colour.22 At
the end, Helārāja returns to the problem of the universal by restating the grammarians’ position on the issue, according to which there is no need to postulate
the existence of universals in cognitions, because the similarity we recognize
in knowledge is adequately explained on the basis of the universals present in
their contents, that is, in the external objects. In Helārāja’s words, “The universal
contained in the object produces a unitary cognition, and the unitary cognition
expresses the universal in the object”.23
The entire passage shows how Bhartṛhari’s ideas on ‘cognitions of cognitions’
were close to those advanced later by the Pratyabhijñā. It is also worth noting
that although Helārāja’s commentary provides welcome additional material,
the basic information is all contained in the stanzas: first, a cognition cannot be
objectified by another because the knowledge that derives from an object is radically different from the one produced by another cognition; second, there is no
need to postulate a universal of cognitions because ‘pure’ cognitions have only
consciousness as their common feature, and consciousness cannot be cognized
by anything but itself; and third, a cognition is always dependent on a content.
The only crucial notion that Bhartṛhari does not mention in these stanzas—even
though Helārāja does—is that only living beings are self-aware of their own cognitions. Nevertheless, in other kārikās of the VP, the idea is clearly expressed.24
Before seeing how the Pratyabhijñā adopted Bhartṛhari’s concepts in their own
works, let us consider few additional passages of the VP dealing with the same
problems.

Bhartṛhari on svasaṃvedana: additional material
Apart from the discussion found at the end of the Jātisamuddeśa, other considerations on the nature of cognitions and self-awareness are scattered throughout
the VP. The most substantial is perhaps the one offered by three kārikās of the
Saṃbandhasamuddeśa (3.3.23–24 and 3.3.26). The first two restate the concept
discussed earlier as follows:
For on [a cognition] that has the nature of a doubt, which is established as
instrumental to determine an object, and which does not abandon its proper
nature, [on top of that] one cannot apply a further doubt. When a [subsequent]

56

Self-awareness
determinative cognition is applied to an [original] one, then the [original]
determinative one does not retain its distinguishing feature.25

Helārāja’s remarks helps to unpack Bhartṛhari’s statement:
When there is a “determinative cognition”—i.e. a cognition which has the
form of a specific ascertainment, that is to say, whose content is an object being
ascertained—then another, self-restricted, determinative cognition (nirṇaya)
cannot be applied to the first, which is directed at establishing the object. For
the own nature of a cognition lies in being dependent on an object. Hence, if
one in conceiving a cognition eliminates that, one will be led away from the
core nature of the cognition, precisely because that cognition would freely get
the status of an object. We have in fact previously proven that “the cognition
of a pot” cannot be the object of another cognition, since that would imply the
loss of [the cognition’s] defining nature, because [the cognition] would abandon its nature of subject (viṣayitvatyāgāt) by becoming the object of another
cognition (jñānāntaraviṣayatve). Just as in a unitary cognitive event a cognition that is engaged with some other object cannot be itself the object of
knowledge—since its activity is not directed at itself—likewise, the expressive
aspect of a linguistic unit cannot be the expressed one: the expressive aspect
of the word “inexpressible” does not exclude that its meaning is expressible,
because that activity [of the word] is not in contradiction with itself.26
The big novelty here is the connection, which Helārāja makes explicit, between
the nature of a cognition and that of a linguistic expression. As Bhartṛhari himself
stresses soon after, the reference-aspect of linguistic unit is not to be confused
with the word-aspect: “A linguistic unit which is employed as expressive cannot
be the expressed one. That by which something is cognized cannot be cognized by
something else in the same context”.27 As for this, Helārāja comments:
“Being denoted” (abhideyatā) is a notion that excludes that of “being engaged
in the action [of denoting something else]”, if applied at the same time; for a
thing that is employed to express something else cannot turn back to itself. It
is indeed the very nature of things that what is endowed with the capacity of
the subject cannot be at the same time the locus of the capacity of the object;
this means that it is contradictory, etc., to attribute to the same locus, at the
same time, both independence and dependence.28
Thus, cognitions and words have a very similar nature, insofar as they reveal both
themselves and their content simultaneously. The idea is put forth very clearly
already in the first chapter of the VP:
Just as in a cognition both the content and the cognition itself are perceived,
in the same way in a linguistic expression both the meaning and the form of
that very linguistic expression are manifested.29

Self-awareness

57

Later in the same chapter, Bhartṛhari seems to hint at the idea that it is useless
to talk about cognition independently from a content.30 In the second chapter, he
explicitly says that a cognition never appears in a ‘pure’ state and that is always
coloured by the object.31 Still, in a passage of the Dravyasamuddeśa, he seems
to entertain a slightly different notion, namely, that although a cognition cannot
be posited without a content, there is nonetheless a sharp difference between the
nature of an object and that of the cognition:
Just as the qualities of an object are utterly non-existent in the cognition, and
just like that which is utterly non-identical is established as identical, similarly, the forms of the transformations are utterly non-existent in reality, and
yet that which is utterly non-identical appears as identical.32
Concerning this point, Helārāja’s commentary is more straightforward, as it puts
the question in the well-known terms of the dichotomy between what is inert (the
object) and what is sentient (the cognition). Interestingly, he flavours Bhartṛhari’s
affirmations with arguments that come straight from Dharmakīrti, perhaps with
the mediation of a later commentator:
According to the Vijñānavāda view, since what is manifested as having the
form of the content of a cognition actually does not exist, a quality like the
colour “blue” etc. is self-contained, inert and absolutely absent in a sentient
cognition. Thus the author says that there is no similarity between what is
sentient and what is inert on the basis of some part. With regard to this it has
been affirmed: “If there were similarity [between a cognition and its object]
on the basis of one aspect, then everything would apprehend everything. But,
on the other hand, if there were similarity in all aspects then a cognition
would cease to be a cognition”.33
On the whole, the passages we have quickly surveyed show how Bhartṛhari was
well aware of and upheld the idea that cognitions are by nature self-reflexive; he
was also one of the earliest thinkers to regard svasaṃvedana as the hallmark of
living entities and to claim that due to its very nature, a cognition can never be
objectified. Finally, he also believed that although a mental state—and similarly,
language—is always about something, the reflexive aspect of a cognition must be
regarded as different from the intentional one. In the next section, we examine to
what extent Bhartṛhari’s ideas were known to the Śaivas.

Pratyabhijñā’s appropriation of Bhartṛhari’s theses
The most straightforward proof that the Pratyabhijñā authors were aware
of Bhartṛhari’s discussion of svasaṃvedana is the fact that in the ĪPVV
­Abhinavagupta cites two of the stanzas of the Jātisamuddeśa we examined earlier (VP 3.1.106 and 109). The first is quoted precisely where one is expecting
to find it, that is, in the third section of the ‘Chapter on Knowledge’, in which

58

Self-awareness

­ tpaladeva concentrates most of his considerations on self-awareness. More
U
precisely, ­Abhinavagupta quotes VP 3.1.106 while commenting on Utpaladeva’s
Vivṛti on ĪPK 1.3.7. Here the author introduces an aspect that we discuss at length
in the next chapter. Ordinary reality, Abhinavagupta says, would be inexplicable
without admitting an activity of unification of cognitions, which these thinkers
call anusaṃdhāna and which belongs only to the subject of experience. In the passage in question, Abhinavagupta is referring to the notion of non-objectification
of knowledge to show that the way the Buddhists prove non-existence is wrong.
In doing so, he quotes the VP as an authoritative source, restating the well-known
idea that a cognition is self-luminous and not objectifiable; otherwise, infinite
regress will follow. He says:
[Utpaladeva] now examines the Buddhist way of establishing non-existence
with the intention to show that the aforementioned idea whereby ordinary
apprehension, directed at itself or at other things, is produced on the basis
of “a distinction from what is different” does not hold. With regard to this,
it has repeatedly been proven that knowledge has a unitary, self-illuminating
nature. As the venerable [Bhartṛhari] said: “Just as a light is never illuminated
by another light, in the same way what has the nature of knowledge is never
made visible in another knowledge”. Therefore, on the basis of the fact that a
cognition is not liable to be merged with another cognition, it might be said
that if there were two cognitions, a third one should be there to know them.34
The second stanza Abhinavagupta quotes, VP 3.1.109, comes in a different section of the work, whose content is nevertheless similar to the previous one. We are
in the fourth section of the ‘Chapter on Knowledge’, precisely in ĪPK 1.4.6, where
Utpaladeva maintains that memory never operates on the original perception. The
common phrasing “I had this perception in the past” is just a linguistic analysis
of a more accurate sentence, such as “this thing was perceived by me in the past”.
The point is again to emphasize, even linguistically, that knowledge cannot be
objectified. In this regard, Abhinavagupta brings in Bhartṛhari right at the beginning of his discussion by saying:
One may object that when a pot is remembered, that is to say, it is in the
condition of an object of knowledge, then the original cognition should come
together with the knowing subject, but if that [original cognition] is remembered as an object of cognition, what else can be said? We reply. Even if we
say, “I had a perception of a pot”, it is the pot the object of the cognition. As
the venerable [Bhartṛhari] said: “The cognition ‘I have the cognition of a
pot’ is different from the cognition of the pot. The cognition of the pot gives
access to the object”.35

The source of Pratyabhijñā’s notion of self-awareness
Both Śāntarakṣita’s and Bhartṛhari’s conception of self-awareness, with their
strong emphasis on the innate reflexive component of consciousness, clearly

Self-awareness

59

prefigure the way in which the Śaiva thinkers understood the notion. Hence, one
can legitimately ask whether Utpaladeva again reworked a Buddhist notion and
made it fit to his own agenda or Bhartṛhari was really the original source of his
considerations. It is really hard to answer this question. On the one hand, we can
reasonably suppose that the Śaivas were aware that in Buddhist philosophical
circles the notion of svasaṃvedana had different interpretations; on the other, it
is a fact that Bhartṛhari predates Śāntarakṣita of almost two centuries and that
the Pratyabhijñā intellectuals quoted him as their source of inspiration. The last
point is evidently a non-compelling argument, for the Śaivas could have quoted
Bhartṛhari a posteriori, only to give an authoritative aura to their affirmations.
At the end of the day, they could not certainly quote a Buddhist source for that
purpose! Still, one cannot dismiss the possibility that Bhartṛhari could have been
a real model for them. With the possible exception of the Prābhākara Mīmāṃsā,
the grammarian was quite solitary in defending the very same position the
Pratyabhijñā argued for, that is to say, that both notions of svasaṃvedana and self
are veridical ones. That said, if Bhartṛhari’s proximity to Pratyabhijñā’s philosophy is already evident in their understanding of svasaṃvedana, much more profound is the impact the grammarian had on the way the Śaivas developed a theory
of consciousness, which, as we will see in the next chapter, is strictly related to the
fact that humans possess a language.

Notes
1 Śāntarakṣita and Kamalaśīla argued that the two main philosophical traditions of Indian
Mahāyāna Buddhism give a coherent and comprehensive account of reality only if
reconciled. In their view, the Yogācāra approach is the best at explaining how conventional reality works, while Madhyamaka’s theory of emptiness is the best account with
regard to the ultimate truth. The notion is clearly stated in MA 92–93: “By relying on
the cittamātra system, know that external realities do not exist. And by relying on this
[Madhyamaka] system, know that no self at all exists, even in that mind. Therefore,
by holding the reigns of reasoning, as one rides the chariots of the two systems, one
becomes a real Mahāyānist” (Blumenthal, 2004, pp. 171–172). The notion that there
are two distinct dimensions of truth is widespread in Buddhist philosophy. Possibly the
oldest explicit formulation is due to Nāgārjuna (see MK 24.10).
2 On this specific section of the TS see a recent monograph by Saccone (2018).
3 paricchedaḥ sa kasyeti na ca paryanuyogabhāk / paricchedaḥ sa tasyātmā sukhādeḥ
sātatādivat // (TS 2010). “There is no reason to ask to whom this determination belongs,
[since] determination is the very nature of that [cognition], just like delight and so on is
the very nature of pleasure etc.”. In his commentary on the TS, the Pañjikā, Kamalaśīla
adds: ātmaiva hi sa tasya prakāśātmatayā pariccheda ity ucyate, yathā sukhādeḥ
sātateti. na hi sukhasyeti vyatirekanirdeśamātreṇa tato ‘nyatā sātatā bhavet. tasmād
yady api nīlasya paricchedaḥ pītasyeti vā vyatirekīva vyapadeśas tathāpi svabhāva eva
sa tathā nīlādirūpeṇa prakāśamānatvāt tathocyate, svasaṃvedanarūpatvāj jñānasya.
“For it has been said that determination, because it has the nature of light, is the very
nature of that [cognition], like delight is the very nature of pleasure and so on. For if
one simply refers to the delight of pleasure, this does not imply that the delight is something altogether different from the pleasure. Therefore even if the cognition of blue or
yellow it is talked about as if different from blue or yellow, nevertheless that is the very
nature [of the cognition], insofar as it is expressed so because it is manifested as blue
and yellow. And the reason is that a cognition has always the nature of self-awareness”.

60

Self-awareness

4 See, for instance, TS 2012–2015, which are quotations from ŚV Śūnyavāda 184–187.
5 This is particularly evident in TS 2022–2023 (in which Śāntarakṣita sums up the epistemological argument introduced by Dharmakīrti in the PV in almost paraphrasing it)
as well as in TS 2024, which clearly evokes Dignāga’s appeal to infinite regress.
6 svarūpavedanāyānyad vedakaṃ na vyapekṣate / na cāviditam astīdam ity artho ‘yaṃ
svasaṃvidaḥ // (TS 2011).
7 vijñānaṃ jaḍarūpebhyo vyāvṛttam upajāyate / iyam evātmasaṃvittir asya yā ‘jaḍarūpatā
// (TS 1999). TSP elaborates on this as follows: na hi grāhakabhāvenātmasaṃvedanam
abhipretam. kiṃ tarhi? svayam, prakṛtyā prakāśātmatayā nabhasthalavarttyālokavat.
“Self-awareness is not to be meant as a knowing entity. As what? But rather as being
intrinsically of the nature of light, as the light for the sky”.
8 In this regard, Williams quotes Kamalaśīla, who in his Tibetan commentary on the MA
affirms that the self-revealing nature of a cognition is evident even to cowherds. To this
he adds an explicit remark by a later author, Mokṣākaragupta (eleventh and twelfth
c.), who in his Tarkabhāṣā says: anubhavaprasiddhaṃ ca svasamvedanatvaṃ katham
apahnūyeta. “The nature of self-awareness is established by perception, how can it
be refuted?” (Williams, 1998, p. 24). As Yao has noted, “by rejecting the articulated
epistemological formulations, they [i.e. Śāntarakṣita and Kamalaśīla] have returned to
a Mahāsaṃghika position, according to which a self-cognition is more simple, fundamental and soteriologically oriented” (Yao, 2005, p. 149).
9 Apart from TS 1999, Sāntarakṣita insists elsewhere, too, that “consciousness occurs as
the very opposite of that the nature of which is insentience”, amounting to saying that
“self-awareness is that which makes consciousness not unconsciousness” (Yao, 2005,
pp. 21–22).
10 jñeyastham eva sāmānyaṃ jñānānām upakārakam / na jātu jñeyavaj jñānaṃ
pararūpeṇa rūpyate // (VP 3.1.105).
11 yathā jñeyaṃ vyatiriktasāmānyarūpeṇa rūpyate, rūpavat kriyate, naivaṃ jñānaṃ
saṃvidātmasamavetena vyatiriktasāmānyarūpeṇa rūpyate. jñeyadharmaḥ kilāyaṃ yat
pararūpeṇa rūpaṇam. jñānaṃ tu [a*]svatantraṃ jñeyam eva na bhavati. “While the
content of a cognition is represented, i.e. appears, in the form of a distinct universal, this is not the case for a cognition, which is never represented in the form of a
distinct universal, because it is always accompanied by self-consciousness. In fact,
the distinguishing mark of the content of a cognition is that its representation takes
place through another form, whereas a cognition is dependent on the content but never
becomes it” (Helārāja on 3.1.105).
12 bāhyaparavaśatvenāsvādhīnatvāj jñānānāṃ svata eva vailakṣaṇyānupapatteḥ bahir
abhinnena nimittena tatra bhāvyam. “Now, being unacceptable that cognitions possess
differentiation by nature—for they are dependent, insofar as they are determined by
something external—such a differentiation must take place on the basis of an external,
unitary cause” (Helārāja on 3.1.105).
13 yathā jyotiḥ prakāśena nānyenābhiprakāśyate / jñānākāras tathānyena na
jñānenopagṛhyate // (VP 3.1.106).
14 jaḍavailakṣaṇyaṃ hi prakāśakatvam iti tasyāpi prakāśyatve jaḍatāpattiḥ. “If a cognition were illuminated, it would acquire the nature of an inert thing, for its nature of
being an illuminator is what distinguishes it from an inert thing” (Helārāja on 3.1.106).
15 arthaprakāśakāle ca prakāśakasyāprakāśe ‘rthasaṃvedanam eva na syāt.
prakāśāsañcetane tallagnārthasañcetanāsiddheḥ. uttarakālaṃ tu vedanaṃ kvopayogi.
utpannāyāṃ ca prakaṭatāyāṃ ātmasamavetasya tadānīṃ jñānasyāsañcetanān mama
prakaṭito ‘rtha ity ātmagāmi saṃvedanaṃ na syāt. “Furthermore, if at the moment of
the cognition of a content the illuminating cognition were lightless, there would be
no apprehension of the object at all, because if a cognition is not sentient the content
connected with such a cognition cannot be established. And [if the cognition is not perceived at the same time of its content] what would be the use of a cognition occurring

Self-awareness

61

later in time? In fact, when a manifestation takes place, one could not have a knowledge directed at oneself such as ‘this object has been manifest to me’, since at that very
moment the cognition directed at oneself would be insentient” (Helārāja on 3.1.105).
16 ghaṭajñānam iti jñānaṃ ghaṭajñānavilakṣaṇam / ghaṭa ity api yaj jñānaṃ
viṣayopanipāti tat // (VP 3.1.109).
17 anukāryapratyayā eva hi viṣayena janyante nānye jñānālambanāḥ, vyavadhānāt,
sārūpyabālena ca grāhyagrāhakabhāvaḥ [Iyer’s edition °bhāvena]. vaidharmyena na
ca ghaṭajñānaṃ jñānāntare pratibhāsate. ato na tad gṛhyate. “For only cognitions that
are the content of a further cognition derive from the object, not the others, which are
[in turn] founded on cognitions. The reason is that there is an intervention [of a cognition] between the two. A relationship of ‘apprehender’ and ‘apprehended’ is established due to the force of a similarity. But the cognition of a pot appears in the other
[i.e. second-order] cognition as having different properties. Hence it is not grasped [by
the second-order cognition]” (Helārāja on 3.1.109).
18 evaṃ ca bodhatvāviśeṣāt yady api jñānajñānam iti mataṃ tad api bāhyaviṣayam evety
uktaṃ bhavati. “Even if one thinks in terms of ‘cognition of cognitions’ because there
is no difference [between the two cognitions] in terms of awareness, the content of
‘the cognition of a cognition’ is nonetheless the external object. This has been said”
(Helārāja on 3.1.109).
19 na hi saṃvidākāras tajjñānābhimate pratibimbībhavati. sārūpyavaśena
grāhyagrāhakabhāvaḥ. anyathā jñānatvāviśeṣād idam asya saṃvedanam iti
pratiniyamo na syāt. ghato iti tu yad etad bāhyaviṣayaṃ jñānaṃ tad viṣayopanipāti
viṣayākāram upādatte. “For the consciousness-nature of a cognition is not reflected
in what is imagined to be its cognition. The relation between apprehender and apprehended is based on similarity. If that were not the case, since there is no distinction in
terms of awareness, there would be no rule to determine what is the perception of what.
But a cognition, whose content is an external object like a pot, conforms itself to that
very object and assumes its form” (Helārāja on 3.1.109).
20 ghaṭajñānam iti tu jñānaṃ na jñānarūpānupāti, yato ghaṭajñānagataṃ viṣayam
nirūpya, jñānarūpaṃ kim api tad ity etāvad yadi paraṃ nirūpayituṃ śaknoti, na tu sā
tadīyā bodharūpatā tasya pratibhāsate, parasaṃvedana iva. pareṇa hi ghaṭajñānam
asyotpannam iti kayācid yuktyā jñānaṃ paricchidyate, na tu svavatparasya
pratibhāsate iti tato vilakṣaṇaṃ na tasya paricchedakam. “But the cognition ‘this is
the cognition of the pot’ does not conform itself to the nature of the cognition [‘this
is a pot’]. In fact, by ascertaining the ‘cognition of the pot’ as a content, [the cognition of the cognition of the pot] can at most ascertain that [the cognition of the pot] is
some form of knowledge; yet the conscious nature of [the cognition of the pot] is not
reflected in [the cognition of the cognition of the pot], as it happens in the case of the
cognition of another person. A cognition is determined by another on the basis of a certain linguistic expression, such as ‘he had the cognition of a pot’, but this knowledge of
another cognition is not manifested for others as it is for oneself, hence the [cognition
of the cognition of a pot] is different from the cognition of a pot and does not determine
it” (Helārāja on 3.1.109).
21 yato viṣayarūpeṇa jñānarūpaṃ na gṛhyate / artharūpaviviktaṃ ca svarūpaṃ
nāvadhāryate // (VP 3.1.110). “For what has the nature of a cognition is not apprehended as having that of an object. Cognition’s own nature is not grasped separately
from the object”.
22 na ca grāhyākāro jñānasvarūpam, aupādhikatvāt. yathā sphaṭikasya nīlādi. “­Moreover,
the manifestation in the form of an apprehended content is not the proper nature of a
cognition; it is rather a temporary qualification, just like the colours blue etc. are for a
crystal” (Helārāja on 3.1.110).
23 jñeyasāmānyasyābhinnajñānajanakatvenābhinnajñānasya ca jñeyatāpratipādakatvena
(Helārāja on 3.1.110).

62

Self-awareness

24 See, for instance, the Vṛtti on 1.134.
25 na hy saṃśayarūpe ‘rthe śeṣatvena vyavasthite / avyudāse svarūpasya saṃśayo ‘nyaḥ
pravartate // (VP 3.3.23). yadā ca nirṇayajñāne nirṇayatvena nirṇayaḥ/prakramyate
tadā jñānaṃ svadharme nāvatiṣṭhate // (VP 3.3.24). I am following Houben’s reading
of the last pāda instead of Rau’s svadharmenāvatiṣṭhate. Houben (1995a, p. 222).
26 viśeṣāvadhāraṇarūpe
nirṇīyamānārthaviṣaye
nirṇayajñāne
tadaivārthaparicchedavyāpṛte ‘paraḥ svagato nirṇayo na pravartate. jñānasya
hy arthapāratantryaṃ svadharmaḥ. ata eva jñānāntaragrāhyatvaṃ na bhavatīti
ghaṭajñānam iti prāg eva pratipāditam iti jñānāntaraviṣayatve viṣayityāgat svadharmasya haniḥ.
27 na ca vācakarūpeṇa pravṛttasyāsti vācyatā/pratipādyaṃ na tat tatra yenānyat pratipadyate // (VP 3.2.26).
28 karaṇasanniveśinas tadaivābhideyatā viruddhā, anyapratipādanapravṛttasya tadaiva
pratyudāvṛttyātmani vyāpārābhāvāt. vastusvabhāvo ‘yaṃ yat kartṛśaktiyuktaṃ na tat
karmaśakter adhikaraṇaṃ tadaiva bhavati, svātantryapāratantryayor ekadaikatra
virodhādity arthaḥ.
29 ātmarūpaṃ yathā jñāne jñeyarūpaṃ ca dṛśyate / artharūpaṃ tathā śabde svarūpaṃ ca
prakāśate // (VP 1.51).
30 jñeyena na vinā jñānaṃ vyavāhare ‘vatiṣṭhate (VP 1.89ab). “In ordinary reality, one
cannot establish a cognition without a content”.
31 darśanasyāpi yat satyaṃ na tathā darśanaṃ sthitam / vastusaṃsargarūpeṇa tad
arūpaṃ nirūpyate // (VP 2.426). “The true nature of a cognition is not as it appears; it
is formless, and it is ascertained in connection with an object”.
32 yathā viṣayadharmāṇāṃ jñāne ‘tyantam asaṃbhavaḥ / tadātmeva ca tat siddham atyantam atadātmakam // tathā vikārarūpāṇām tattve ‘tyantam asaṃbhavaḥ / tadātmeva
ca tat tattvam atyantam atadātmakam // (VP 3.2.9–10).
33 vijñānavāde viṣayākārasya bhāvato ‘satyatvān nīlādis tatgato dharmo jaḍo ‘jaḍe
jñāne ‘saṃbhavī atyantam iti. jaḍājaḍayor na kenacid aṃśena sārūpyam ity āha.
tathā coktam: ekadeśena sārūpye sarvaṃ syāt sarvavedanam/sarvātmanā tu sārupye
jñānam ajñānatām vrajet // (Helārāja on VP 3.2.9–10). This stanza is a variant of
Dharmakīrti’s PV 3.434, which according to Birgit Kellner’s reconstruction was originally different, with the two half-verses in the reverse order: sarvātmanā hi sārūpye
jñānam ajñānatāṃ vrajet / sāmye kenacid aṃśena syāt sarvaṃ sarvavedanam //
(­Kellner, 2009, p. 201). The stanza is quoted in three different commentaries on
Kumārila’s ŚV, Śūnyavāda 20, those of Uṃveka Bhaṭṭa (730–790), Sucarita (tenth
c.), and Pārthasārathi Miśra (eleventh c.). Manorathanandin comments on this by saying: na ca jaḍayor grāhyagrāhakabhāvaḥ kenacid aṃśena vastutvanīlatvādinā sarvaṃ
jñānaṃ sarvasyārthasya saṃvedanaṃ syāt. sarvaṃ vā nīlajñānaṃ sarvasya nīlasya
vedanaṃ syāt. “There is no relationship of knower-known between two inert things,
otherwise any knowledge would know everything. Or each cognition of blue would
cognize all blue things”.
34 anyavyavacchedair grahaṇavyavahāro ‘pi svaparaviṣayo ya ucyate, so’pi nirvahed ityāśayena saugatīyam abhāvasiddhiprakāram eva vicārayati. tatra jñānaṃ
svaprakāśaikarūpam iti upapāditam asakṛt. yathāha tatrabhavān ‘yathā jyotiḥ
prakāśena nānyenābhiprakāśyate / jñānarūpaṃ tathā jñāne nānyatrābhiprakāśyate’.
tataś ca jñānāntareṇa ekajñānasaṃsargayogyaṃ na bhavati yenaivaṃ ucyate yadi dve
jñāne bhavetām, tadvijñānajñānaṃ tṛtīyaṃ bhavet (ĪPVV vol. 1, p. 276–277). The current editions of the VP present a slightly different reading of this kārikā: yathā jyotiḥ
prakāśena nānyenābhiprakāśyate / jñānākāras tathānyena na jñānenopagṛhyate//.
35 nanu ghaṭe smaryamāṇe vedyadaśādhiśādhiśayini anubhavo grāhakenaiva milatu,
tasminn eva tu smaryamāṇe vedyīkṛite kiṃ vācyam. ucyate. ghaṭe mama anubhavo
‘bhūd ity api kathane ghaṭa eva vedyaḥ. yathāha tatrabhavān ‘ghaṭajñānam iti jñānaṃ
ghaṭajñānavilakṣaṇam / ghaṭa ity yaj jñanaṃ viṣayopanipāti tat // (ĪPVV vol. 2, p. 53).

5

A linguistic consciousness

In the previous chapters, we have seen how the Pratyabhijñā authors claimed to
have countered the Buddhist criticism of the notion of personhood. They appealed
to an epistemic principle the Buddhists themselves share, namely, that cognitions
are self-aware and cannot be the object of other cognitions. The Śaivas maintain
that the Buddhists actually hold a wrong and contradictory view on the question,
since they do not properly understand the self-conscious nature of a cognition.
According to them, cognitions or mental states have a purely conscious dimension which can never be the intention of a mental state, not even of the very same
one. This aspect, the Śaivas argue, is what subjectivity consists in and is the basis
of the very notion of self. Using a contemporary philosophical jargon, we could
say that the Pratyabhijñā authors hold that the notion of self ‘supervene’ on that of
pure phenomenal subjectivity. Put another way, this means that whenever there is
a change in pure phenomenal subjectivity, a corresponding change in the notion
of self necessarily occurs. The converse is, of course, not true, and Utpaladeva
explicitly says it.1
In this and the following chapters, we explore in depth what kind of subjectivity the Pratyabhijñā authors had in mind, what are its main characteristics, and
whether the overall picture the school holds is consistent. I shall basically argue
that Utpaladeva formulated a theory whereby ‘to be conscious’ comes down to
having second-order representations of first-order mental states. This secondorder representations are conceptual and language driven. Although the Śaivas
made a substantial effort to lay out the details of this theory, the credit for developing it are to be given to Bhartṛhari. Accordingly, I first discuss what the VP has to
say on the question, with extensive reference to similar positions held in contemporary philosophy of mind. Afterwards, I show how Pratyabhijñā’s treatment of
the question follows Bhartṛhari’s one rather faithfully.

Are cognitions language dependent?
Indian philosophers have often and heatedly discussed the question whether cognitions have a perceptual nature, a conceptual one, or rather a mixing of the two. If
in perceptual knowledge the stress is on the sensory character of cognitions, conceptual knowledge is normally regarded as dependent on linguistic elaboration.

64 A linguistic consciousness
In other words, the very fact that we can formulate concepts presupposes the
existence of language. If we consider the history of the question in classical India,
the idea that a dependable cognition is only perceptual is a centrepiece of the
Buddhist Pramāṇavādins’ philosophical program. A cognition is true when it is
based on perception.2 However, a perception is immediately followed by a conceptual elaboration of the sensory data, which, as we have already seen, can have
some practical utility but it is in the end inherently mistaken. The opposite view,
championed by Bhartṛhari (but supported also by Jaina philosophers and by the
so-called ‘New Logic’, the Navya-Nyāya), is the one we discuss at length in the
following: a veridical cognition is actually entirely conceptual, there being no
cognitive episodes that occur independently from language. There are finally less
drastic positions, advocated by the traditions of Mīmāṃsā and old Nyāya, according to which cognitions are partly perceptual (nirvikalpaka) and partly conceptual
(savikalpaka).3
Bhartṛhari addresses the issue of the conceptual character of knowledge in a
cluster of stanzas contained in the first chapter of the VP. In a well-known verse,
very often quoted by both classical authors and modern scholars, he quite straightforwardly states that language and knowledge have a close connection:
In the world, there is no cognition without the pervasion of language. All
knowledge shines as if pierced by language.4
From a linguistic point of view, this stanza displays two peculiar verbs, anugam
and anuvyadh, which, more or less metaphorically, point out that language and
knowledge are strictly intertwined, perhaps that there is even an invariable concomitance between the two.5 Philosophically speaking, the situation is more intricate, and to understand what Bhartṛhari thinks, we should reflect on the key terms
he is using. In the first place, it is worth considering what Bhartṛhari has in mind
when he talks about knowledge. In VP 1.131, the word he uses to convey the
notion is jñāna (together with the synonym pratyaya). The expression jñāna indicates a very generic act of awareness that stands for a variety of mental events
(beliefs, desires, intentions, knowledge, etc.) having an intentional content (i.e.
mental events that refer to or are about things); jñāna has thus a broader connotation than that of the related term pramā, which indicates a veridical cognition whose appropriateness is guaranteed by the application of reliable epistemic
means.6 However, both jñāna and pramā presuppose a conception of knowledge
that is different from the one developed in Euro-American epistemology. Whilst
Euro-American thinkers commonly see knowledge as a disposition, in the form
of a justified true belief,7 Indian ones tend to regard it as an episodic moment
of awareness (Potter, 1984, pp. 310–311). The concept of jñāna can therefore
be assimilated to the contemporary notion of ‘mental representation’, or ‘mental
state’.8 Just like a mental representation, jñāna can be regarded as a mental object
possessing intentionality and semantic properties, such as content, reference, truth
conditions, truth-value, etc. (Pitt, 2000). If we agree on this construal, Bhartṛhari
is eventually claiming that to have mental representations, one needs a language.

A linguistic consciousness 65
The second question takes into account concerns what sort of language
Bhartṛhari has in mind when he affirms that language had a close relationship to
knowledge. Even though we cannot be sure whether the notion was circulating
before him, this author is credited with having disseminated the idea that speech is
a multidimensional phenomenon, having different levels of manifestation. In the
whole of the VP, the concept is discussed in only one place and hardly resumed
elsewhere; still the notion stuck and became almost immediately regarded as a
central doctrine of the grammarians. In a nutshell, Bhartṛhari claims that language
develops progressively and that audible, public speech (vaikharī vāc)—the one
we use in our everyday exchange—is an external manifestation of two inner levels: an intermediate one (madhyamā vāc) and an innermost linguistic principle
(paśyantī vāc) from which the two lower stages derive:
The “elaborated” word (vaikharī) is that which is intelligible to others, which
is grasped by the sense of hearing, it is fixed in each and every case and has
an audible character. It is a conjoined [word], a collection of discrete sounds
whose correctness is well-established or in which the correct grammatical
formation is lost. Being present in the axle of a cart, in a drum, a flute or a
lute, it possesses unlimited manifestations. The “middle” word (madhyamā),
on the other hand, is internal, it has a sort of temporal sequence and is grasped
by the mind only. Yet, according to some, the middle word is pervaded by
the activity of subtle breath and, even if in it sequence is contracted, it possesses a detectable [kind of] breath. The “seeing” word (paśyantī), is that in
which sequence is subsumed and, albeit unitary, it is pervaded by the capacity to produce sequence. It is movable and immovable and it is that which is
obtained by concentration; it is concealed and pure; it has the form of the contents entering into it, the form in which all contents disappear into it and no
form at all; it manifests itself in the form of meanings which are diversified,
associated and all rest on it. Hence it possesses unlimited manifestations.9
If the status of vaikharī and paśyantī is relatively clear, for they correspond
respectively to oral language and to an inner linguistic kernel from which the
former derives, the nature of the intermediate state, madhyamā, is less obvious.
I think the main question is whether Bhartṛhari refers with it to a natural language, Sanskrit in the specific case, or to something altogether different, namely a
­‘Language of Thought’ (LoT).
The LoT hypothesis has first been introduced in contemporary philosophy of
mind by Jerry Fodor (1975, 2008). The theory belongs to the spectrum of materialist theories of mind, more precisely to functionalism. In this view, a mental
state is never defined in terms of its ontological nature, namely, by what a mental
state is made of, but by the relations it bears with (1) the external sensory inputs,
(2) the behavioural outputs it produces, and (3) other mental states. Fodor combines the basic functionalist approach with computationalism, that is, the doctrine whereby mind is compared to a computer, with mental states equated to
the software running on the brain, which in turn corresponds to the hardware.

66 A linguistic consciousness
The relations occurring between mental states, sensory inputs, and behavioural
outputs are syntactical and governed by an algorithm. A mental state is therefore
nothing but a computational state, and it corresponds to a sentence of a language
of the mind, LoT, which is sometimes also called ‘Mentalese’. Put another way,
the idea behind the notion of LoT is that thinking takes place through a system
of symbols that is different from the one we use in ordinary speech. This hypothetical idiom is regarded as an innate code of the mind and as capable of being
translated into natural languages.
The point is whether this model can be used to account for Bhartṛhari’s conception that language is a multilevel phenomenon. Without pushing the comparison
too far, I think it is worth noting that some aspects of Bhartṛhari’s conception of
madhyamā are quite similar to the contemporary understanding of LoT. According
to the definition, the author himself gives in the Vṛtti, madhyamā has three peculiar
features: internality (antaḥsaṃniveśa), mind dependence (buddhimātropādāna),
and sequentiality (parigṛhītakrama). These three characteristics remind those
contemporary theorists identify in LoT (Fodor, 1975). First, LoT is distinct from
public language, a feature that corresponds to madhyamā’s ‘internality’. Second,
LoT is exclusively based on the mind, which is consistent with madhyamā’s
‘mind dependence’, for it is conceived as an organized network of mental representations. Third, LoT’s basic signs (i.e. mental representations) have a syntactical structure, a feature that approximately corresponds to the notion conveyed by
the expression krama, intended as ‘regular arrangement’. I am not sure if all this
is sufficient to prove that Bhartṛhari conceived madhyamā as a form of LoT, but
at the same time, I do not see crucial evidences showing that it is not. Indeed, the
remark made after the definition of madhyamā, according to which some thinkers believe that this stage too is based on the activity of breath—an argument
for considering madhyamā a case of natural language—seems to corroborate the
idea that Bhartṛhari’s first option is actually to regard this stage as mental. The
main advantage of the hypothesis that madhyamā is a LoT is that we come by an
elegant picture of the three stages of vāc: vaikharī indicating a natural language,
madhyamā a LoT, and paśyantī representing consciousness. All the same, either
we consider madhyamā a LoT or a natural language; the interpretation I am proposing is not affected in any substantial way.

Knowledge and truth: the arthakriyā stance
Whether Bhartṛhari conceived language as a mental or natural fact, his idea that
all cognitions or mental states involve concepts and in turn that concepts entail
language needs to be put to the test. To understand how he eventually manages to
put forward a reasonable explanation of this claim, we must start from an issue
that is only apparently unrelated. We must consider the criterion whereby one can
distinguish between reliable and non-reliable knowledge. The topic has widely
been debated by Indian philosophers, who have generally adopted three different stances on the issue. The first, advocated by the realist schools of Nyāya and
Mīmāṃsa, holds that a cognition is true when it matches a state of affairs in the

A linguistic consciousness 67
external world, that is, when it is in accordance with external reality (yathārtha).
The position is by and large similar to the Euro-American correspondence theory
of truth and faces the same objections (Perrett, 2016, p. 55). The second theory,
traditionally associated with the Sāṃkhya philosophical tradition, is historically
less influential. It holds that a cognition is true when it is in harmony (saṃvāda)
with a network of related cognitions. The theory does not make any claim about
the ontological nature of the contents of knowledge and is roughly comparable to
Euro-American ‘coherentism’. The third and final position holds that a cognition
is true when one can act successfully on its basis (arthakriyā). In this view, the
truth of a cognition lies in its pragmatic value. This theory is traditionally associated with the work of the Buddhist Pramāṇavādins.10
What about Bhartṛhari? The author of the VP is not particularly keen to discuss
epistemological questions, especially by adopting the typical framework centred
on pramāṇas.11 Furthermore, he does not seem interested in the notion of pramā,
which does not appear in the context under discussion. However, since jñānas
are mental representations and possess truth conditions, there must be a criterion
to establish their appropriateness, or as Potter put it, their “workability” (Potter,
1984, p. 318). In this regard, although the question is not addressed straightforwardly, it is clear that Bhartṛhari prefers the pragmatic, arthakriyā approach over
the others. It is sufficient to consider three examples. In the Vṛtti on VP 1.131, he
explicitly says that indeterminate, non-conceptual knowledge produces no effect
at all: “Just like one has a verbal potentiality in a contracted form, similarly no
effect is produced by indeterminate knowledge, even if it arises in relation with
objects that are [already] known”.12 In VP 1.129, Bhartṛhari states that the awareness of actions carried out in ordinary life is grounded on language: “In the world
all that is required to be done is dependent on language. A child too understands it
on the basis of the traces of previous births”.13 The notion is finally made explicit
in VP 1.135, where it is claimed that it is indeed language that urges all creatures towards successful actions. If it were not for language, the stanza goes on,
everything would be as insentient as a piece of wood: “Language urges all creatures towards successful activities. If it were to disappear, all this world would be
unconscious like a piece of wood or a wall”.14
The main contention here is that to be regarded as proper knowledge, a cognition must have a pragmatic value. And it is already clear that what makes knowledge capable to initiate a successful action is its being inherently conceptual and
linguistic. It remains to be seen whether there are good reasons to substantiate
this claim.

A higher-order theory of consciousness
The reason why language is required to have dependable cognitions is given by
Bhartṛhari mostly in a negative way. Let us consider this telling passage from the Vṛtti:
If knowledge were not by nature linguistic, that very vague cognition that
has been produced, being unable to contribute to another cognition, would

68 A linguistic consciousness
not function as a means to accomplish the action of knowing. In fact, once
there is a cognition of a bare object, whose different parts are not functional to
each other and are mutually independent, immediately after comes a unification, a synthesis, the production of a unitary content, that is, the grasping of
conjoined capacities as undifferentiated; all this is connected to the linguistic
nature of cognitions.15
It is difficult to overstate how crucial this passage is. Bhartṛhari argues that true
knowledge presupposes an act of mental unification, a synthesis of the bare sensations one acquires through the senses. Without it, these very sensations would
remain unrelated and not functional to each other. This act of unification implies
an activity of the mind that is capable of scanning the sensory data and the associated mental states so as to produce a “unitary content”. All this evidently entails
that for Bhartṛhari, there are two kinds of cognitions or mental states. A first-order
one directly produced by the external stimuli, which is accompanied by a higherorder one that operates on the former and makes it conscious. Bhartṛhari seems
thus to envisage what contemporary theorists of mind call a ‘higher-order theory
of consciousness’.
Higher-order theories of consciousness came to the fore to explain how a mental state is conscious. The supporters of the theory believe that a mental state is
conscious “if one is conscious of that state in some suitable way” (Rosenthal,
2009, p. 240). This means that consciousness eventually comes down to the representation a mental state has of another. Differently put, consciousness is regarded
as a transitive condition, in the sense that it requires that a given state has another
one as its content. The first and most obvious objection to this account is that it
leads to vicious regress. If one needs a second-order mental state to explain the
conscious state of the first-order one, one would need a third-order one to account
for the second and so on endlessly. The proponents of higher-order theories meet
the objection by simply claiming that higher-order states are unconscious, thus
avoiding the charge of circularity. That some mental states are conscious while
others are not is therefore a fundamental precondition for ‘higher-order representation’ theorists. The typical example they provide is subliminal perception, that
is, the situation in which one is aware of things but in a non-conscious way.
Returning to Bhartṛhari, if we want to formulate the hypothesis that he is conceiving consciousness and cognitions in higher-order terms, we must look for passages
suggesting that some cognitions can be entertained unconsciously. With regard to
this, Vincenzo Vergiani has clearly shown how Bhartṛhari accepts the existence of
‘liminal cognitions’ (Vergiani, 2012), that is, of cognitive states one is in unconsciously, typically because they happen very quickly or one’s attention is focused
elsewhere. They are liminal because they are in between: they are unconscious but
not altogether different from conscious ones, mainly because they can be recalled
to mind later on. It suffices here to mention an example contained in the Vṛtti, in
which Bhartṛhari talks of somebody walking fast without being consciously aware
of the grass and clods of earth he is proceeding through.16 Again, the text explains
the unconscious nature of these mental representations with the fact that one cannot

A linguistic consciousness 69
initiate any action on their basis. Accordingly, Bhartṛhari’s point is that a successful activity requires an awareness of one’s own mental states, which consists in a
second-order representation of the first-order ones based on experience.
In addition to this, high-order theorists need to further explain how higherorder mental states operate on first-order ones, and they typically diverge on the
question. There are two main competing theses in contemporary philosophy of
mind. The first claims that higher states have a perceptual awareness of their firstorder counterparts (Armstrong, 1968; Lycan, 1996, 2004). According to this view,
mental states are conscious due to a specific capacity of mind, an inner sense that
scans and perceives the mental states one is in. On the other hand, the second
thesis argues that the awareness higher-order states have of first-order ones is not
perceptual but conceptual; it is a thought. The upholders of either theories have
arguments on their side, with some problems being better solved by the perceptual
hypothesis and others better served by the conceptual one. This is not the place to
evaluate the merits of one proposal over the other. What is important to our purposes is to see where Bhartṛhari’s higher-order theory is positioned. The passage
quoted earlier does not say anything explicit about the question, but the fact that
language is for Bhartṛhari always involved in cognitions is a strong indication that
for him higher-order states operate conceptually on first-order ones.
This eventually leads us to the main issue: why is language necessary to
have high-order representations, and in the end, to possess consciousness and
knowledge?

Language and consciousness: how to justify their relationship?
Rather surprisingly, in the VP the claim that cognitions and mental states are
inherently dependent on language remains essentially unjustified. The fact is certainly peculiar for we are possibly talking about the most decisive aspect of the
entire discussion. Still, Bhartṛhari seems somehow to take for granted a picture of
the following sort: if consciousness is produced by higher-order representations,
then an individual must possess a system of these representations. By a system,
I mean a number of basic elements whose relations are determined by a set of
rules, that is to say, by a syntax. Without such a system, the activity of unification
and synthesis of the data provided by the senses—a synthesis which is required
to act successfully—would be impossible. The whole claim is of course controversial, and one would have hoped to find a more explicit explanation. Yet it is
not certainly indefensible. To appreciate the plausibility of Bhartṛhari’s claim, it
is useful to go through some of the arguments in support of the hypothesis that
language and consciousness enjoy a strict relationship. The first reason to take
into account is the native one, that of the communis opinio of classical India. The
arguments is not necessarily strong, but most Indian philosophers would actually agree that conceptual thinking always entails language. The point of contention is rather if all knowledge is really conceptual. Once established that such
is the case, the passage from conceptuality to language is generally regarded as
unproblematic.

70 A linguistic consciousness
The second argument brings us back to the question of LoT. One can argue that
an LoT is precisely a language, hence a system of signs endowed with basic units,
which are combined according to syntactic rules and expressed in sentences of
Mentalese. In this weaker sense, it is certainly possible to claim that to think and
to cognize, one necessarily needs a (non-natural) language.
Still, and this would be a third argument, several contemporary theorists have
defended stronger versions of the idea that there is a close relationship between
natural, public language, consciousness, and thought. For instance, the supporters of Higher-order thought claim that one of the main features of higher-order
representations, and consciousness in general, is reportability, that is, the capability to report that one is in a given mental state. If one is capable to verbally
report being in a mental state, then that state must be conscious (Rosenthal, 2009,
pp. 243–244). Furthermore, it is worth considering in some detail one of the
most influential arguments in support of the idea that thought presupposes language, the one advanced by Donald Davidson (1975, 1982). Davidson argues
for an audacious (and contentious) version of the theory—sometimes labelled
‘­lingualism’—­insofar as he not only claims that to have high-order thoughts one
needs a natural language but that thought per se consists in the capacity to have
higher-order thoughts. This leads him to conclude that a creature without language
is inherently incapable of thinking, thus barring animals and infants from having
rational thoughts. Davidson’s arguments can be summarized as follows. His point
of departure is that rationality is a social capacity, which pertains only to creatures
able to interpret others. In his view, to interpret means to ascribe thoughts to other
creatures. Davidson also believes that rationality’s essential feature is the capacity
to have propositional attitudes. ‘Propositional attitude’ is a label used to describe
mental states like ‘x wish that p’, ‘x thinks that p’, ‘x hopes that p’, etc., in which
p is a proposition. Examples may be: ‘I wish that you were here’, ‘I think that
she will be back soon’, and the like. For Davidson, the only way to determine
if a person is rational—i.e. if she has thought—is to determine whether she has
propositional attitudes. But for him, the capacity to have propositional attitudes
requires a natural language. Let us consider two different sets of arguments for the
claim. The first relies on the notion that propositional attitudes are per se semantically opaque. Semantic opacity indicates the fact that if we change the words of a
sentence that describes the reference of a propositional attitude, the truth-value of
the sentence can change. For instance, the propositional attitude ‘The dog believes
the cat went up the oak tree’ is different from the propositional attitude ‘The dog
believes the cat went up the oldest tree in the garden’. The truth-value of the two
sentences may in fact be different or identical. The point is that we cannot a priori
determine the truth-value of the sentence because we are unable to tell whether the
dog knows that both sentences refer to the same object. The only way at our disposal to tell if the contents of a propositional attitude is opaque or not is by knowing a language. Coming back to the example, Davidson’s point is that we could
know whether the dog believes that ‘the oak tree’ is coreferential with ‘the oldest
tree in the garden’ only by asking him. Since the dog cannot reply to our question, the conclusion is that to have rationality one must have a natural language.

A linguistic consciousness 71
A second line of reasoning in support of lingualism runs as follows. Assume that
beliefs are the most fundamental propositional attitudes, insofar as they are presupposed by all other kinds of propositional attitudes. The notion is easy to grasp:
even if you fancy an apple (i.e. a desire, hence a specific propositional attitude),
you must believe that there is an apple beforehand, so you must have a belief. The
second point is that a belief never occurs in isolation, but it is always accompanied
by a set of related beliefs. If you believe that New Delhi is the capital of India,
you also necessary believe that there is a city called New Delhi, a country called
India comprising a city whose name is New Delhi, and so forth. The third and
crucial point is that you cannot have beliefs without having the concept of belief.
How does Davidson justify this rather disputable affirmation? He reflects on the
fact that a belief can be true or false. There are nevertheless instances in which a
belief we were sure to be true turns out to be false upon subsequent reflection, or
because of new information. If the belief that I have a coin in my pocket is falsified by a later belief, that is, by the fact that I realize that the pocket is actually
empty, this means that the later belief is directed at the earlier one, namely, it is
a representation, a concept of another belief. Accordingly, since beliefs can be
established as true or false, they must entail the notion of objective truth. But the
notion of objective truth is always correlated for Davidson to that of subjective
truth: if a certain belief can be true or false, then the holder of the belief must be
aware that there is a difference between how things are (objective side) and how
they appear to him (subjective side). But to distinguish the truth-value of a belief,
one must have a standard of evaluation that is shared. This standard of evaluation
is what Davidson calls intersubjective truth, and it is that which develops only in
the contest of linguistic interpretation and communication. As Davidson puts it:
What would show command of the subjective–objective contrast? Clearly
linguistic communication suffices. To understand the speech of another,
I must be able to think of the same thing she does; I must share her world.
I don’t have to agree with her in all matters, but in order to disagree we must
entertain the same proposition, with the same subject matter, and the same
standard of truth. Communication depends, then, on each communicant having, and correctly thinking that the other has, the concept of a shared world,
an intersubjective world. But the concept of an intersubjective world is the
concept of an objective world, a world about which each communicant can
have beliefs.
(Davidson, 1982, p. 327)
All this allows Davidson to argue that beliefs are informed by language. Since
beliefs are the basic propositional attitudes and the latter the hallmark of thought,
it follows that in order to have thought, one requires a natural language.
A different set of arguments to show the dependence of thought on language
has been put forward more recently by José Luis Bermúdez (Bermúdez, 2003).
Different from Davidson, Bermúdez claims that non-linguistic creatures can actually have thoughts; still they are unable to think a specific type of them, namely,

72 A linguistic consciousness
those which are themselves the content of higher-order representations. Actually,
the focus of Bermúdez’s elaboration is not on second-order representations but
rather on the way first-order ones are conveyed. He argues that reflexive thinking
is possible only if the target thoughts (i.e. the first-order representations) have
‘vehicles’ that allow them to be the object of further thoughts. The point is to
understand what these vehicles are and how they work. In principle, there are just
two possibilities: the target-thoughts can have vehicles that operate either at a subpersonal or a personal level. The jargon might sound intimidating, but the concept
is simple: if target-thoughts operate at a personal level, it means that the owner of
the thoughts is conscious of them; by contrast, in the case of sub-personal level,
target-thoughts operate on a deeper level, and the subject is not conscious of them.
This case clearly corresponds to Fodor’s LoT, that is, to a system of representations that occur in the mind and of which the subject of experience is not aware.
On the other hand, if the vehicles of target-thoughts operate at personal level,
then we have only two further possibilities: either the vehicles are sentences of
a natural language or are pictorial representations, in short, images. Given this
overall background, Bermúdez claims that (1) vehicles of target-thoughts operate on a personal level, hence there is no LoT, and (2) the vehicles of targetthoughts are sentences of a natural language. How does he justify these claims?
As for claim 1, he argues that reflexive thinking seems to imply that the subject
is conscious of the thinking. His most explicit argument is that having reflexive
thinking entails having the target-thoughts in mind, together with the awareness
that these thoughts are inferentially and logically related. This kind of awareness
is not possible if one’s LoT is the vehicle of target thoughts, because LoT operates
by definition at sub-personal, unconscious level. The argument seems to hint at a
wider problem in philosophy of mind. One of the main features of thought is its
rationality, that is, the fact that thoughts are logically related. A materialist theory
of mind that wishes to reduce mental states to brain states will have to explain
why mental states have syntactical and logical relations, whereas brain states have
not. By arguing that reflexive thought is conveyed by vehicles happening at a
personal, conscious level, Bermúdez avoids this objection and claims that rationality comes together with the vehicles themselves. This brings us to Bermudez’s
second affirmation: granted that the target-thoughts have vehicles operating at
a personal level, are these vehicles sentences of a natural, public language, or
pictorial representations? Let us consider the latter case first. In the case of a
pictorial representation, we have a mental map which is ‘isomorphic’ with what
it represents. Isomorphism simply means that the relations between the elements
of a mental model are mapped onto the relations existing out there, between the
objects of representation. For Bermúdez, to conceive the vehicles as a mental
map, thus based on images, is to understand representation in a weak sense. All
that is needed is in fact a relation of resemblance and exemplification between
the map and its content. Conversely, conceiving the vehicles as sentences of a
language entails a strong interpretation of the representation. Isomorphism is not
enough in this case. What is needed are some basic representational units which
are to be combined according to certain identifiable rules. In sum, the problem

A linguistic consciousness 73
with pictorial representation is that it is difficult to see how images can inferentially be related. Mental maps can be associated and be the content of other maps,
but to have inferential capacity, they must be reduced to propositions, that is to
sentences of a language. Thus, by an argument he himself calls ‘by elimination’,
Bermúdez concludes that at least a specific kind of thought—reflexive thought—
necessitates speech.
Where would Bhartṛhari position himself in what we have said so far? I think
some of his ideas can be fruitfully compared with those we have just gone through.
As we saw earlier, his most crucial notion is that to have consciousness, thought
and knowledge one needs a syntactical relation between mental states and cognitions. This parallels quite explicitly the idea Bermúdez is defending, that is, that
one needs language to guarantee the inferential connections between thoughts.
Without a linguistic synthesis, the single mental states one experiences would
turn out to be impossible to relate to one another in a logical and successful way.
The problematic aspect is whether to consider Bhartṛhari’s language—or, better
an aspect of his multidimensional conception of language—as a LoT. One may
be induced to consider the idea that the system of representations he has in mind
is purely mental and innate. As I said earlier, I do not see in principle any objection to this conclusion, but it must be evaluated with other statements he makes.
In support of this notion, there is, for instance, the fact that Bhartṛhari insists that
language is ingrained in infants and animals as well, which are creatures who do
not possess a natural language. Also, this clearly goes against Davidson’s conception whereby a natural language is a presupposition for thought and rationality.
On the other hand, Davidson’s idea that language is an intersubjective affair that
takes its proper form in public speech is something that Bhartṛhari would certainly not reject, especially as far as semantic questions are concerned. It is thus
evident that trying to accommodate Bhartṛhari’s position in a rigid framework is
of little use. What is indeed helpful is to reckon that the problem of the relationship between language and thought can be approached in a variety of ways and
that these approaches are useful as a background—as a common ground, to use
­Davidson’s words—to better circumscribe and appraise Bhartṛhari’s position.

The svasaṃvedana objection
I think the picture I have conjured up thus far correctly represents Bhartṛhari’s
view. There is nonetheless a potentially fatal objection to this account. To admit
the existence of higher-order representations implies that these representations
act on first-order ones. And this obviously goes against the principle we have
discussed at length in Chapters 3 and 4, according to which a cognition is selfconscious and cannot be the content of another. How to make sense of these seemingly contradictory statements?
We have already encountered a possible way out of the conundrum. It is the
one devised by contemporary higher-order theorists, who claim that higher-order
representations are themselves unconscious, so there is no risk of infinite regress.
In Bhartṛhari’s case, this would mean that the action of coordination of cognitions

74 A linguistic consciousness
he regards as crucial to having reliable knowledge is not experienced consciously,
a position that on the whole looks like tenable. Yet there is a further way to reconcile the notion of non-objectification of cognitions with that of a higher-order
theory. If one reads carefully the cluster of stanzas and the commentary we have
just analyzed, one cannot fail to notice how often Bhartṛhari lays stress on the fact
that language is present at all cognitive levels. This implies that conceptuality,
which is the hallmark of higher-order representations, is always at work, a view
that allows Bhartṛhari to claim that even the most immediate perceptions have a
conceptual content. This does not count as a proof of the dependence of thought
on language, but it lets us refine Bhartṛhari’s view as follows. When he is defining
what makes a cognitive state what it is, Bhartṛhari is probably not thinking of a
different cognition having the first one as its content. On the contrary, the firstorder mental state must already possess within itself its higher-order representation, thus leading to the conclusion that for Bhartṛhari mental states or cognitions
are self-representational. In other words, mental states seem to own two aspects: a
world-directed one and metacognitive one, occurring simultaneously. This view is
known to specialists in Indian thought, since it is close to the notion Dharmakīrti
introduced that knowledge has both perceptional and judgemental (niścaya) sides.
The view is also similar to the notion of ‘hybrid higher-order theories’ or ‘selfrepresentational’ theories, advanced by some contemporary philosophers of mind
to address difficulties posed by standard higher-order models. Thinkers supporting the idea that a first-order mental state already contains within itself its
higher-order counterpart, back two different understandings of the theory. Some
(Carruthers, 2000) believe that between first- and higher-order mental states, there
is a relation of identity; others believe that they rather enjoy a relation of part
and whole (Gennaro, 1996, 2005; Kriegel, 2003, 2009). If in the former case the
first-order perceptual state becomes conscious due to the higher-order state; in the
latter, what become conscious is a complex state “made up of both the first-order
perception and the higher-order belief” (Carruthers, 2016).

Summary
Before proceeding to see how all this has been highly influential for the
Pratyabhijñā’s conceptions, it is beneficial to sum up what Bhartṛhari intends
when he posits a strict connection between language and cognitions.
1

2

I have started with the assumption that the notion of ‘cognition’ (jñāna,
pratyaya) is equivalent to that of ‘mental representation’. This is because
Indian thinkers normally conceive knowledge as an intentional, episodic
awareness rather than a disposition of the mind. Although different from
pramā, jñāna also has truth-conditions. In force of that, there must be a criterion to distinguish between dependable and non-dependable cognitions.
According to Bhartṛhari, this criterion consists in cognitions’ causal efficiency (arthakriyā), that is, the possibility to act successfully on the basis of
a given mental representation.

A linguistic consciousness 75
3
4
5

6

One can initiate a successful action only through a synthesis of first-order,
world-directed mental states. Such a synthesis is guaranteed by higher-order
representations that are conceptual.
Bhartṛhari assumes that these higher-order, conceptual representations are
rooted in language, be it natural or mental. The VP does not provide substantial evidence for this affirmation, which it is nevertheless defensible.
Bhartṛhari further holds that a cognition is self-conscious and never the
object of another. But he also believes that higher-order representations (i.e.
concepts and language) are present in all cognitive states. This entails that
each mental representation is at the same time experience directed (it is about
something) and self-directed (it is about itself), thus being capable to generate
a higher-order thought of itself.
The conclusion is that in order to have cognitions and to be conscious in general, language is required.

Pratyabhijñā’s appropriation of Bhartṛhari’s conceptual
scheme
The picture we have discussed so far had a huge impact on the way Utpaladeva
and Abhinavagupta conceived consciousness. The impact is not just a matter of
theoretical resemblance, for the Śaivas actually quoted most of Bhartṛhari’s stanzas we have hitherto discussed as authoritative sources for their work.17 To appreciate how far-reaching Bhartṛhari’s influence was, it is useful to start with the very
definition of consciousness Abhinavagupta gives in the ĪPV on 1.5.13. This is the
stanza in which Utpaladeva argues that between language and consciousness, an
intimate relationship obtains:
The word citi, derived from cetayati, “to make conscious”, indicates the
activity of consciousness, whose essential nature, its essence, is a reflexive
awareness characterized by self-savouring. To explain: a pot does not have
savouring with respect to itself; it does not have a reflective awareness as
a self, it does not cognize with respect to itself, nor it shines as having an
uninterrupted nature. This is why it is said to be unconscious. On the other
hand, a person named Caitra has savouring with respect to himself, for he has
the power to produce an effort towards a raised state, that is the “I”; he has
reflexive awareness as a self and cognizes precisely with respect to himself.
He is manifested in a limited semblance—that is to say as “this”—in a form
that is different from the “I”, and is associated with countless manifestations
like blue, yellow, pleasure, pain, their absence etc. This is why it is said that
Caitra is conscious. Thus, it is not at all established that reflexive awareness
is one thing and non-reflexive awareness is another, for reflexive awareness
is capable of everything: it makes identical to itself what is different, and
makes itself a different thing; it brings together both difference and identity,
and demotes both of them, which were previously unified. This is precisely

76 A linguistic consciousness
its essential nature. Furthermore, reflexive awareness’s essential nature is
“languageing”, consisting in inner speech. This “languageing” is independent
from any linguistic convention and is an uninterrupted spontaneous savouring. It is like an internal nodding of the head; it is the life of the conventional
sounds existing at the Māyā level, such as “a” etc., because it is the internal
support of a reflexive awareness such as “this is blue” or “I am Caitra” and
so on. Since speech denotes, conveys, all things through reflexive awareness,
consciousness is said to be the “word”. This word is supreme because of its
completeness. Hence, having a conscious nature and resting on itself, this
word arises freely, it never declines, it exists permanently as the “I”. This
primary freedom of the self is said to be its sovereignty, its supremacy, its
independence from others.18
Abhinavagupta’s definition of consciousness (cit, caitanya) at the beginning of this
passage is rather compelling. To be conscious, he says, means to have a reflexive
awareness of one’s own mental states. We have already encountered the expression ‘reflexive awareness’ (vimarśa, pratyavamarśa) in Chapter 3. It should be
by now clear that vimarśa indicates nothing but higher-order thought, that is, the
activity second-order mental representations perform on first, experience-based
ones, which the Śaiva thinkers usually call “cognition”, “light”, prakāśa. Crucially, Abhinavagupta adds that consciousness is not limited to the possession
of higher-order thought. In it there is also the involvement of a purely subjective
aspect, which Abhinavagupta refers to with the puzzling expression camatkāra,
‘savouring’, which we discuss more in detail in Chapter 6.
Also in this case, one could file the same objection already raised to Bhartṛhari’s
higher-order theory. What about the principle that cognitions are never objectifiable? Pratyabhijñā’s answer runs along the same lines: higher-order thought are
intrinsic to first-order representations and do not imply that they have the latter
as content. Interestingly, Abhinavagupta provides us with a clue about this idea
when he says that there is no difference between vimarśa and its alleged opposite,
that is, first-order experience. The passage is often interpreted as indicating that
humans possess an infinite capacity for conceptual representations, but I think
that the author is also hinting at the fact that there is no radical difference between
higher-order thought and first-order representations, thus meaning that the former
is inherent in the latter.
The other aspect to examine is that, just like Bhartṛhari, the Pratyabhijñā
claims that higher-order representations are language informed. It is worth considering the way in which Abhinavagupta defends the claim. The most important
aspect seems to be that he regards language as an inner capacity of the mind.
He does not even use the standard Sanskrit word for language, śabda, rather
an action-noun form, śabdana, by which he aims at highlighting the verbal and
hence dynamic character of the expression. This śabdana, he says, is not based
on conventions like public language but is rather the basis of it. Again, the same
question arises. Are we talking about an LoT? The question is legitimate but
hard to answer. In any case, what is really similar to Bhartṛhari’s conception is

A linguistic consciousness 77
the reason the Śaiva thinkers give to justify the notion that there is no vimarśa
without language. The point is again that without language, there is no way to
coordinate cognitions and therefore no way to carry out a successful and logically tenable action. ­Abhinavagupta backs the idea with two arguments. The first
concerns language acquisition. Without a cognitive synthesis, he claims, a child
would never be able to put together the non-conceptual cognitions he experiences
in a first moment.
To begin with, in this world, the essential characteristic of consciousness is
the association with language, in a way that is comparable to the indication
of something with a finger etc. If it were not so, a child would not learn a
linguistic usage when he sees a human exchange for the first time. In fact,
a child first hears the word in the form of a series of non-conceptual cognitions, then he sees the external referent of the word before his eyes, and
thereafter a surface in which the external referent is no longer present. On
hearing linguistic expressions such as “bring the pot” or “carry the pot”, how
can the idea “this is the meaning of that”, namely this is the meaning of the
word “pot”, this is the meaning of the word “bring” and of the word “carry”
appear in the heart of the child? The answer is that to say “this object is the
meaning of that word” is essentially an act of unification, and unification is a
conceptual activity.19
The second argument concerns the notion that conceptuality and language are
present also in immediate perceptions, thus meaning that first-order cognitions
and higher-order representations occur together. Consider the following passage
from ĪPV 1.5.19:
Even admitting that an immediate cognition is by nature momentary, in that
too there is reflexive awareness. This is necessary. How could it be otherwise? In fact, if it were not so [i.e. if there was no reflexive awareness in
the case of immediate cognitions], then a person proceeding rapidly with a
specific purpose, or reciting letters quickly, or reading fast a book of mantras, would not reach, pronounce or recite what she has in mind. To explain:
how can a person reach the place she has in mind without a reflexive awareness, whose essential aspect are unification and separation, and consists of
the knowledge of the place, the will to proceed, the actual proceeding, the
awareness of the movement, the unification of another purpose, the desire to
leave, the knowledge of a different place, the desire to proceed towards it and
so forth? The same applies to reading quickly, speaking etc. where, specifically, there is a union between places and organs of articulation etc. Since
here one does not experience a gross conceptual cognition as following the
immediate one, there is quickness. Therefore, there must be a subtle reflexive-awareness consisting of verbal potentiality in a contracted form, because
one gets a gross conceptual cognition when a verbal potentiality becomes
manifest by expansion.20

78 A linguistic consciousness
If we combine the information we have gathered so far, the influence of Bhartṛhari’s
conceptual scheme on Utpaladeva is evident and hard to overstate:
1

2

3

For the Pratyabhijñā, mental states or cognitions (prakāśa) are conscious
insofar as they are the content of higher-order representations (vimarśa/
pratyavamarśa/parāmarśa). As in Bhartṛhari’s view, these mental representations are presumably produced at the same time of cognitions. This is why
Abhinavagupta is able to say that consciousness consists in an act of “reflexive awareness characterized by self-savouring” and that “is not at all established that reflexive awareness is one thing and non-reflexive awareness is
another”.
Higher-order representations have a linguistic nature. This is why
­Abhinavagupta says: “Reflexive awareness’s essential nature is ‘languageing’, consisting in inner speech. This ‘languageing’ is independent from any
linguistic convention and is an uninterrupted spontaneous savouring. It is
like an internal nodding of the head; it is the life of the conventional sounds
existing at the Māyā level, such as ‘a’ etc., because it is the internal support
of reflexive awareness such as ‘this is blue’ or ‘I am Caitra’ and so on. Since
speech denotes, conveys, all things through reflexive awareness, consciousness is said to be the ‘word’ ”.
Action entails a conceptualization, a coordination of cognitions, a mental function the Śaivas calls anusaṃdhāna (or pratisaṃdhāna), which is by the way the
very same word Bhartṛhari uses in the Vṛtti on 1.132.21 Thus, ­Abhinavagupta
affirms that “if it were not so [i.e. if there was no reflexive awareness in the
case of immediate cognitions], then a person proceeding rapidly with a specific
purpose, or reciting letters quickly, or reading fast a book of mantras, would
not reach, pronounce or recite what she has in mind. To explain: how can a
person reach the place she has in mind without a reflexive awareness, whose
essential aspect are unification and separation, and consists of the knowledge
of the place, the will to proceed, the actual proceeding, the awareness of the
movement, the unification of another purpose, the desire to leave, the knowledge of a different place, the desire to proceed towards it, and so forth?”

I think all this is sufficient to show how deep was the impact on Pratyabhijñā’s
philosophy of the doctrines elaborated by Bhartṛhari. One can even go as far as
to ask what the Śaiva thinkers added to Bhartṛhari’s picture. Leaving aside their
theological consideration, I think they supplemented this basic scheme with two
main contributions: the first and by far most important is the stress on the apparently mysterious notion that vimarśa, that is, higher-order representations, have
a savouring. The Śaivas are referring with it to the fact that conscious experience
has a subjective, phenomenal, ‘what it is like to be’ dimension—a ‘savouring’ in
their words—which is difficult to account for in terms of mental representations
and which can be addressed only metaphorically, an aspect that in Bhartṛhari does
not seem to emerge. The second point is the Śaivas’ tendency to espouse a much
more radical version of non-dualism, developing the ideas that cognitions always

A linguistic consciousness 79
entail an awareness of the knowing subject and that external objects have the
same nature as mind or consciousness. We analyze all these questions thoroughly
in the following chapters.

Notes
1 nāhantādiparāmarśabhedād asyānyatātmanaḥ / ahaṃmṛśyataivāsya sṛṣṭes tiṅvāc­
yakarmavat // (ĪPK 1.5.17). “From the existence of notions of ‘I’ etc., one should
not imply a differentiation in the nature of self, because this is produced in so far
as it is the content of the reflexive awareness ‘I’. Exactly in the same way, a verbal action is expressed by personal endings”. With the last remark, Utpaladeva points
out that just like the notion of ‘I’ is the concrete manifestation of pure subjectivity;
similarly, in a linguistic utterance, the action expressed by the verb is manifested by
the use of personal endings. In the ĪPV, in the same verse, Abhinavagupta comments:
aham ityevaṃsvarūpo yaḥ parāmarśo yaś ca īśvaraḥ pramātā ātmā śiva ityādiḥ
anantaprakāraḥ parāmarśaḥ, tasya yady api bhedo’nyonyarūpatā, tathāpi tadbhedāt
hetoḥ asyātmano nirmātṛrūpasya ahaṃparāmarśamayasya nirmeyarūpasya ca
īśvarādiparāmarśāspadasya yo bhedaḥ śaṅkitaḥ sa na yuktaḥ. yata īśvara ityapi yaḥ
parāmarśaḥ, sa īśanaśīle jñātṛtvakartṛtvatattve viśrāmyati, jñātṛtvādi ca jñānādau
svātantryam ananyamukhaprekṣitvam avicchinnajñānayogaḥ avicchedaś ca jānāmi
karomi iti asmadarthaviśrāntiḥ iti asya īśvarasya ātmanaḥ sṛṣṭeḥ sṛjyamānasya
ahaṃvimarśanīyatvam eva. “The reflexive awareness which consists in the ‘I’ assumes
the forms of ‘knower’, ‘self’, ‘Śiva and so forth. Although this appears as having a
mutual differentiation, it is nonetheless wrong to suppose that on the basis of that differentiation there is a difference between the self, which is the cause, the creator, and
whose nature consists in subjective reflexive awareness, and the notions of Īśvara etc.
For even the notion of Īśvara reposes on that which has the nature of the Lord, and
whose essence is knowing and doing. Being a knower etc. means freedom, independence from others, capacity of unrestricted knowledge; this unrestrictedness reposes on
the awareness of ‘I’, as ‘I know’ and ‘I do’. Hence this self is produced, emitted as the
content of subjective reflexive awareness”.
2 See Dignāga’s PS 1.7: bhrāntisaṃvṛtisajjñānam anumānānumānikam / smārtā­
bhilāṣikaṃ ceti pratyakṣābhaṃ sataimiram. “Erroneous cognition, cognition of empirical reality, inference, its result, recollection, and desire are not true perceptions and are
accompanied by obscurity (sataimira)”. The verse is commented as follows in the Vṛtti:
smārtābhilāṣikaṃ ceti pratyakṣābhaṃ sataimiram| tatra bhrāntijñānaṃ mṛgatṛṣṇādiṣu
toyādikalpanāpravṛttatvāt pratyakṣābhāsam saṃvṛtisatsu arthāntarādhyāropāt
tadrūpakalpanāpravṛttatvāt. anumānatatphalādijñānaṃ pūrvānubhūtakalpanayeti na
pratyakṣam. “Erroneous cognition (bhrānti—jnānā) is not a true perception because it
arises conceptually constructing, for example, water, etc., out of such things as vapor
floating over sand. Cognition of empirical reality (samvṛti—saj—jñāna) is not a true
perception because it superimposes something extraneous upon things which are only
empirically true (samvṛti—sat), and thus functions through the conceptualization of
forms of these [extraneous things]. Inference and [the cognition which is] its result,
etc., are not perceptions because they arise through the conceptualization of what formerly has been perceived”. As translated by Hattori (1968, p. 28).
3 Mīmāṃsā’s opinion is that there is an aspect of the cognition which is purely perceptual,
and it is perceived as being such; old Nyāya, on the other hand, claims that the perceptual,
immediate aspect of the cognition is never perceived. It is rather inferred from the fact
that to cognize a determinate cognition, we must beforehand perceive its bare elements.
4 na so ‘sti pratyayo loke yaḥ śabdānugamād ṛte / anuviddham iva jñānaṃ sarvaṃ
śabdena bhāsate // (VP 1.131).

80 A linguistic consciousness
5 The verb anugam literally means ‘to follow, to go after’, but it also expresses the
notion of ‘penetration’. See the entry anugama in Böthlingk and Roth (1855, p. 201).
anuviddhā is glossed as vyāptā by Bhāskara in his commentary on Abhinavagupta’s
ĪPV. See ĪPV, vol. 2, p. 297.
6 Indian philosophers have also often debated whether a cognition is inherently true or if
one needs another cognition to prove the veridicality of the first one. The two positions,
normally indicated with the Sanskrit terms svataḥprāmāṇya and parataḥprāmāṇya,
are respectively associated to Mīmāṃsā and Nyāya. See Taber (1992).
7 However, different positions have recently emerged also in Western epistemology. The
most notable is that of Timothy Williamson (2000), who suggests that knowledge is a
mental state; not to mention the problem posed to the traditional stance by the so-called
Gettier cases, in which one has justified true beliefs without having correct knowledge.
8 ‘Mental state’ and ‘mental representation’ are strictly related terms. Representational
theories of mind define mental states as relations to mental representations. This means
that the intentionality of the mental state is explained in terms of the semantic properties of mental representations. Consider for example the mental state (more specifically, a belief) ‘Elvis is dead’. This mental state is appropriately related to a mental
representation whose propositional content is ‘Elvis is dead’. See Pitt (2000).
9 Vṛtti on VP 1.159: paraiḥ saṃvedyaṃ yasyāḥ śrotraviṣayatvena pratiniyataṃ śrutirūpaṃ
sā vaikharī. śliṣṭā vyaktavarṇasamuccāraṇā prasiddhasādhubhāvā bhraṣṭasaṃskārā
ca. tathā yā ‘kṣe yā dundubhau yā venau yā viṇāyām ity aparimāṇabhedā.
madhyamā tv antaḥsaṃniveśinī parigṛhītakrameva buddhimātropādānā. sā tu
sūkṣmaprāṇavṛttyanugatā kramasaṃhārabhāve ‘pi vyaktaprāṇaparigrahaiva
keṣāñcit. pratisaṃhṛtakramā saty apy abhede samāviṣṭakramaśaktiḥ paśyantī.
sā calācalā pratilabdhasamādhānā cāvṛtā ca viśuddhā ca, sanniviṣṭajñeyākārā
pratilīnākārā nirākārā ca, paricchinnārthapratyavabhāsā saṃsṛṣṭārthapratyavabhāsā
praśāntasarvārthapratyavabhāsā cety aparimāṇabhedā.
10 See in particular Dharmakīrti’s Pramāṇavārttika 2.1–6.
11 Bhartṛhari basically discusses three means of knowledge—perception (pratyakṣa),
inference (anumāna), and verbal testimony (śabda)—but he also believes that the
common systematization of the process of knowledge in terms of pramāṇas is only
conventional. If knowledge is always imbued with language, splitting it into perception, inference, verbal testimony, and so on may be practically convenient but
ultimately misleading. In this regard, it is interesting to note that Abhinavagupta in
the TĀ assumes a similar stance: prakāśo nāma yaś cāyam sarvatraiva prakāśate /
anapahnavaniyāt kiṃ tasmin mānakalpanaiḥ // (TĀ 1.54).
		  apahnutau sādhane vā vastūnām ādyam īdṛśam / yat tatra ke pramāṇānām upapattyupayogite // (TĀ 1.57).
		  “This light in question shines everywhere, and being impossible to deny it, what is
the use of means of knowledge? Both in negating and establishing things, since there is
always that original [reality], what are the reason and the use of means of knowledge?”
See Aklujkar (1989a, 1989b, 2000, 2002); Akamatsu (1999); Todeschini (2010); Ferrante (2017a).
12 Vṛtti on 1.131: yathāsya saṃhṛtarūpā śabdabhāvanā tathā jñeyeṣv artheṣūtpannenāpy
avikalpena jñānena kāryaṃ na kriyate.
13 iti kartavyatā loke sarvā śabdavyapāśrayā / yāṃ pūrvāhitasaṃskāro bālo ‘pi pratipadyate // (VP 1.129).
14 arthakriyāsu vāk sarvān samīhayati dehinaḥ / tadutkrāntau visaṃjño ‘yaṃ dṛśyate
kāṣṭhakuḍyavat // (VpVṛ on 1.135).
15 vāgrūpatāyāṃ cāsatyām utpanno ‘pi prakāśaḥ pararūpam anaṅgīkurvan prakāśana­
kriyāsādhanarūpatāyāṃ na vyavatiṣṭhate. bhinnarūpāṇāṃ cānupakāriṇām ātmātarānātmanām itaretarasya vastumātrājñāne pratyavabhāsamāne yad uttarakālam anu­
saṃdhānaṃ pratyavamarśa ekārthakāritvam avibhāgena śaktisaṃsargayogopagrahaḥ
tad vāgrūpatāyāṃ baddham (VpVṛ on 1.132).

A linguistic consciousness 81
16 tadyathā tvaritaṃ gacchatas tṛṇaloṣṭādisamsparśāt saty api jñāne. . . . “For instance,
even if somebody walking fast has knowledge from the contact with grass and lumps
of earth. . . .” (VpVṛ on 1.131).
17 VP 1.131 is partially quoted by Somānanda in ŚD 2.9 and by Abhinavagupta in both the
ĪPV (Vol. 2, p. 265) and the ĪPVV (Vol. 2, p. 206). VP 1.132 is quoted by ­Utpaladeva in
his commentary on ŚD 2.2 and by Abhinavagupta in both the ĪPV (Vol. 2, p. 265) and
the ĪPV (Vol. 2, p. 206). VP 1.134 is quoted by Abhinavagupta in both the ĪPV (Vol.
2, p. 265) and the ĪPVV (Vol. 3, p. 380). VP 1.135 is quoted by Abhinavagupta in the
ĪPVV (Vol. 1, p. 100). VP 1.159, which states the tripartition of language, is not quoted
verbatim, but the levels of speech are frequently mentioned and debated by all three
main thinkers of the Pratyabhijñā.
18 cetayati ity atra yā citiḥ citikriyā tasyāḥ pratyavamarśaḥ svātmacamatkāralakṣaṇa
ātmā svabhāvaḥ. tathā hi ghaṭena svātmani na camatkriyate, svātmā na parāmṛśyate,
nā svātmani tena prakāśyate, na aparicchinnatayā bhāsyate, tato na cetyata iti
ucyate. caitreṇa tu svātmani aham iti saṃrambhodyogollāsavibhūtiyogāt camatkriyate, svātmā parāmṛśyate, svātmany eva prakāśyate, idam iti yaḥ pariccheda
etāvadrūpatayā tadvilakṣaṇībhāvena nīlapītasukhāduḥkhatacchūnyatādyasaṃkhy
āvabhāsayogena avabhāsyate, tataḥ caitreṇa cetyata iti ucyate. evaṃ ca vimarśaḥ
svātmani avimarśo ‘pi svātmani ity asiddham etat. vimarśo hi sarvaṃsahaḥ param
api ātmīkaroti, ātmanaṃ ca parīkaroti, ubhayam ekīkaroti, ekīkṛtaṃ dvayam api
nyagbhāvayati ity evaṃsvabhāvaḥ. pratyavamarśaś ca āntarābhilāpātmakaśabdana
svabhāvaḥ, tac ca śabdanaṃ saṃketanirapekṣam eva avicchinnacamatkārātmakam
antarmukhaśironirdeśaprakhyam akārādimāyīyasāṃketikaśabdajīvitabhūtam. nīlam
idaṃ caitro ‘haṃ ityādipratyavamarśāntarabhittibhūtatvāt, pūrṇatvāt parā, vakti
viśvam abhilapati pratyavamarśena iti ca vāk, ata eva sā svarasena cidrūpatayā
svātmaviśrāntivapuṣā uditā sadānastamitā nityā aham ity eva. etad eva paramātmano
mukhyaṃ svātantrya aiśvaryam īśitṛtvam ananyāpekṣitam ucyate (ĪPV on 1.5.13).
19 iha tāvat caitanasya ātmabhūto ‘ṅgulinirdeśādiprakhyo ‘bhilāpayogaḥ,
anyathā bālasya prathamaṃ vyavahāre dṛśyamāne vyutpattir eva na syāt.
nirvikalpakajñānaparaṃparayā hi taṃ śabdaṃ śṛṇoti, tataḥ tam arthaṃ puraḥ
paśyati, punas tadviviktaṃ bhūtalaṃ paśyati iti ghaṭam ānaya naya iti vyavahārāt
katham asya ayam artha iti hṛdi parisphureta, idam ghaṭa iti, idam ānaya iti, idaṃ
naya iti, itiyojanāprāṇo hi ayam arthaḥ yojanā ca vikalpavyāpāraḥ (ĪPV 1.5.19).
20 bhavatu vā kṣaṇamātrasvabhāva sākṣātkāraḥ, tatrāpi asti vimarśaḥ. avaśyam caitat.
katham anyathā iti. yadi sa na syāt tat ekābhisaṃdhānena javāt gacchan, tvaritaṃ
varṇān paṭhan, drutaṃ ca mantrapustakaṃ vācayan, na abhimatam eva gacchet,
uccārayet vā, vācayet vā. tathā hi tasmin deśe jñānam—ācikramiṣā—ākramaṇam—
ākrāntatājñānam—prayojanāntarānusaṃdhānam—tityakṣā—deśāntarānusaṃdhiḥ,
tatrāpi
ācikramiṣā
ity
ādinā
yojanāviyojanarūpeṇa
pratyavamarśena
vinābhimatadeśāvāptiḥ kathaṃ bhavet. evaṃ tvaritodgrahaṇavācanādau mantavyam. tatra viśeṣataḥ sthānakaraṇākramaṇādiyogaḥ. atra ca yataḥ paścāt
bhāvisthūlavikalpakalpanā na saṃvedyate, tata eva tvaritatvaṃ iti sūkṣmeṇa
pratyavamarśena saṃvartitaśabdabhāvanāmayena bhāvyam eva. saṃvartitā hi
śabdabhāvanā prasāraṇena vivartyamānā sthūlo vikalpaḥ (ĪPV 1.5.19).
21 See ĪPK 1.3.6 and ĪPKVṛ on 1.5.19.

6

Subjectivity and first-person stance

We have seen so far that the Pratyabhijñā authors conceive consciousness in
higher-order terms. In their view, ‘to be conscious’ comes down to being able
to have a reflexive awareness of the first-order cognitions acquired through the
senses. The Śaivas also contend that this reflexive awareness must necessarily
depend on language, for without a syntactical arrangement—a synthesis—of
mental states, it would be impossible to entertain reflexive thought and to perform any successful activity. We have also emphasized that this theory is so heavily indebted to Bhartṛhari’s conceptions that one may even question whether the
Śaiva authors added something original to the picture. In this chapter, we are
going to positively answer this question. The Pratyabhijñā intellectuals not only
added something new, but they also indeed added something important, for they
maintained that consciousness has a component that differs from the representational activity of higher-order thought. Different from Bhartṛhari, who does not
seem to be aware of this fact,1 Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta were explicitly
saying that consciousness has a purely private, phenomenal dimension. This
dimension is only first-person knowable, as only the owner of the experience is
capable of accessing it. Utpaladeva’s awareness of this aspect is no doubt striking, and it shows how advanced the Śaivas’ conceptions were. In Euro-American
philosophy, the focus on the phenomenal side of consciousness is a rather recent
development, with some philosophers even arguing that this is the fundamental
component of consciousness and the hardest to account for (Chalmers, 1996).
I think it is therefore useful, before returning to Pratyabhijñā’s discussion, to have
a look at how contemporary philosophers of mind have framed the question of the
subjective dimension of consciousness.

Qualia: the subjective dimension of experience
Although the discussions on the nature of mind are traceable to ancient Greek
philosophers, the modern reflection on the issue largely stems from the work of
Descartes, in particular from his analysis of the relationship that exists between
mind and body. The problem Descartes was facing is indeed simple to state: since
we are all aware that mind has an effect on the body and the body affects the
mind, how do we explain their relationship? How does this interaction work?

Subjectivity and first-person stance 83
Unfortunately, the answer is not at all simple, and after centuries, the question
remains challenging. Descartes held the view that mind (res cogitans) and body
(res extensa) are two radically different types of substance—a position today categorized as substance dualism—but he notoriously failed to explain the crucial
point, that is, how the two substances interact. The question fell out of fashion for
some time but resurged in the past decades with an altogether different outlook.
Almost all contemporary mind theorists believe that Descartes is wrong. Most are
in fact reductionist and monist, thus claiming that there is just one substance in the
universe—matter (which would correspond to Descartes’s res extensa)—and that
mental activity is eventually to be explained in terms of it. This position takes various shapes. The most extreme view is that of ‘physicalism’, according to which
all that exists, from rocks and chairs to animals and minds, is eventually reducible
to the basic categories of modern physics. The motto of physicalism is that mental
states are states of the brain, which are in turn explained physiologically, that is,
as the firings of neurons caused by molecular and atomic activity. A milder view is
that of ‘naturalism’, which heavily relies on the idea of ‘supervenience’, a concept
we have briefly touched upon in Chapter 5. Something supervenes on something
else if there cannot be a difference in a micro state without having a difference in
the macro one. Accordingly, naturalism maintains that mental states supervene
on purely physical states and that the former must be described as modifications
of the latter. The motto of naturalism is that mental states depend on brain states.
Both versions of materialism are evidently influenced by the successful paradigm
of modern science. Materialists of all sorts believe that even if we are unable to
lay out the details of how a mental state relates to the physical world, it is just a
matter of time. Sooner or later (neuro-)science will be able to provide us with a
clear picture of all features of mind, including consciousness. The current most
successful versions of materialism are essentially two: functionalism and computationalism. In the first case, the mind is not analyzed in terms of what it is but in
terms of what it does. In this view, a mental state, say x, is defined functionally
and is determined by three related factors: (1) the cause of x, (2) the effect of x
on other mental states, and (3) the effects x has on behaviour. This functionalist
approach has expectedly evolved towards a computational theory of mind. In this
view, probably at the moment the most popular explanation of consciousness,
the mind is compared to a Turing machine. Roughly speaking, a Turing machine
is a computational device that transforms inputs into outputs on the basis of an
algorithm. Accordingly, the mind is seen as encoding its inputs (the sensory data)
into a system of representations (usually instances of some kind of LoT), which
interprets them according to a systematic set of rules, to produce the expected
outputs (behaviours).
Despite its popularity among contemporary theorists, the materialist stance has
been questioned on the basis of several arguments. If in the contemporary debate
Cartesian, substantial dualism is hardly defended, there are several philosophers
who keep believing that mind and matter have actually different qualities. The
idea here, often labelled ‘property dualism’, is that there is only one substance
in the universe, which can however assume physical or mental properties. Also

84

Subjectivity and first-person stance

in this conception, the notion of supervenience plays a critical role, since mental properties are supposed to supervene on physical ones. But unlike naturalists, property dualists believe that the mental is ontologically different from the
physical and irreducible to it. Non-reductionist philosophers have come up with a
series of arguments to question the standard materialist view.2 Most of them point
out that conscious experience has a subjective, first-person aspect that cannot be
reduced to physical matter or, differently put, cannot be naturalized. In their opinion, there is an explanatory gap between what is going on in the brain, at the neural
level, and what we experience in our phenomenal consciousness. They indicate
the phenomenal aspects of experience with the term qualia (singular quale), a
name which is meant to convey the kind of subjective experience one possesses in
a given mental state. Using an expression made famous by Thomas Nagel (1974),
there is “something that is like to be” in a certain mental state. According to nonreductionist philosophers, this ‘what-it-is likeness’ cannot be fully described by
a materialist, third-person stance and requires an altogether different approach.

The Pratyabhijñā’s qualia: camatkāra
My point is that the Pratyabhijñā authors had a concept that is strikingly similar
to that of qualia. They express the idea that consciousness has a private, phenomenal dimension using a very peculiar expression, camatkāra, we have already
encountered in the previous chapter. The word has traditionally been interpreted
as connected to the onomatopoeic Sanskrit interjection camat, which expresses a
sense of surprise. Therefore, the primary meanings of camatkāra are ‘astonishment’ and ‘wonder’. As V. Raghavan has influentially put it: “Originally the word
camatkāra was an onomatopoeic word referring to the clicking sound we make
with our tongue when we taste something snappy, and in the course of it semantic
enlargements, camatkāra came to mean a sudden fillip relating to any feeling of a
pleasurable time” (Raghavan, 1942, p. 269). Still, the expression became central
to the aesthetic theories that developed in India throughout the first millennium
CE and in particular to those refined in Kashmir during Pratyabhijñā’s high time
(Shulman, 2010). Abhinavagupta himself was a towering figure in aesthetics,
giving seminal contributions to the field. Given this context, it is hardly surprising that many contemporary interpreters have sought to explain the camatkāra
appearing in the Pratyabhijñā works in the light of the meaning the term has in
the works of literary theorists. In this latter case, ‘wonder’ generally refers to a
state of sheer bliss one undergoes during aesthetic experiences, typically a theatrical performance. This state is clearly regarded as a transcendent condition,
plunging the subject of experience in a reality that is radically different from the
ordinary. Given this background, I argue that although the two interpretations
might be connected (in a way that we are going to see later), in the Pratyabhijñā
works, camatkāra is first of all a philosophical notion, which is used to indicate
the purely phenomenal aspect of consciousness. Utpaladeva was the first to use
this concept technically. Abhinavagupta inherited the notion and perhaps adapted
it to fit into the context of his aesthetic doctrines. To show this, it is worth having

Subjectivity and first-person stance 85
a quick look at the most important occurrences of the term in the Pratyabhijñā’s
literature.
The first instance of camatkāra to take into consideration occurs in ­Utpaladeva’s
commentary on the ŚD. In ŚD 1.7cd-8, Somānanda discusses metaphysical matters. Specifically, he tries to get out of the predicament of non-dualism: how can
a unitary consciousness, which in this passage is identified with Śiva, produce the
multiplicity of things and events we are used to encounter in common experience?
With regard to this, Somānanda affirms that the tension the unitary consciousness
has towards the production of multiplicity coincides with its will, in particular
with the very first moment of will.3 This tension, the author goes on, is caused by
the unfolding of a sense of joy, which is a power that characterizes consciousness
and Śiva himself. This already prompts something to reflect upon, for if to convey the notion of ‘joy’ Somānanda uses the word āmoda, Utpaladeva glosses it
with camatkāra. Still more interesting is a subsequent remark of the commentary,
in which Utpaladeva defines camatkāra as that which “consists in the reflexive
awareness of its own nature as it is”.4 Utpaladeva is already introducing here
the idea that reflexive awareness (vimarśa, parāmarśa), that is, the representational capacity of high-order thought, is related to the notion of camatkāra: if one
removes from the concept of vimarśa its representational or intentional side, what
remains is a purely phenomenal and subjective aspect that corresponds to mental
state’s “own nature as it is”.
In the ĪPK, camatkāra/camatkṛti is not attested, but it appears three times in the
ĪPVr. The most informative instance occurs in the commentary on ĪPK 1.5.11.5
Utpaladeva is putting forward here one of his most crucial tenets, namely that
one’s reflexive awareness is the essential property of knowledge and that which
makes knowledge what it is. Without it, he goes on, a cognition, even if capable of
being coloured by its content, would be actually inert, just like a crystal or a mirror. The reason Utpaladeva gives to explain the difference between an inert object
and a conscious one is precisely that the latter possesses camatkāra/camatkṛti.
Without reflexive awareness, he says, a cognition would be transparent—thus
able to be affected by the object—but not at all conscious. To be conscious, a
cognition must possess savouring, that is to say, camatkāra.
In his works, Abhinavagupta also offers insightful remarks on camatkāra. The
first, and possibly the oldest, is to be found in a non-Pratyabhijñā context, in
the Abhinavabharati (ABh), Abhinavagupta’s commentary on classical India’s
seminal text on performing arts, the Nāṭyaśāstra. In it Abhinavagupta says that
“camatkāra is the mental activity of the subject of enjoyment who is immersed
in the vibration of a marvellous enjoyment”. It is worth noting that Raniero Gnoli
favoured a different reading of the passage, leading to a rather diverging interpretation. For him, the expression ca manaḥkaraṇam is to be emended to camataḥ
karaṇa. Consequently, the translation becomes: “The word camatkāra, indeed,
properly means the action being done by a tasting subject (camataḥ karaṇam), in
other words, by the enjoying subject who is immersed in the vibration of a marvellous enjoyment”.6 In both versions of the text, the emphasis on the pure enjoyment
of experience—on experience per se—is evident. Still, Gnoli’s reconstruction,

86

Subjectivity and first-person stance

though disputed,7 moves more explicitly towards this connotation because it takes
away from camatkāra the problematic connotation of ‘wonder’ and shows that the
term is actually used to convey the purely phenomenal aspect of any experience.
The ĪPVV contains other definitions of camatkāra to take into account. In a passage, Abhinavagupta affirms that “camatkṛti is the action of a person savouring,
that is, the bliss consisting in the full achievement of fruition”.8 In a previous section of the work, the author delves into a more philosophical explanation of the
concept, again connecting the notion to consciousness and subjectivity. He says:
“Because they share the same nature, camatkāra is the reflexive awareness that
we call the ‘I’, in its accomplished state when [contents such as] blue and so on
are contracted. It is the supreme fruition consisting in bliss”.9 Again, it is worth
stressing how Abhinavagupta relates the concept to the notion of fruition, that is,
to experience as it is, in its purely phenomenal aspect.
Coming to the ĪPV, the most important section in which camatkāra is discussed
is the one we have analyzed at length in Chapter 5, which is worth reconsidering
here, too:
The word citi, derived from cetayati, “to make conscious”, indicates the activity of consciousness, whose essential nature, its essence, is a reflexive awareness characterized by self-savouring. To explain: a pot does not have savouring
with respect to itself; it does not have a reflective awareness as a self, it does not
cognize with respect to itself, nor it shines as having an uninterrupted nature.
This is why it is said to be unconscious. On the other hand, a person named
Caitra has savouring with respect to himself, for he has the power to produce
an effort towards a raised state, that is the “I”; he has reflexive awareness as a
self and cognizes precisely with respect to himself.10
Abhinavagupta states here that camatkāra is the essential feature of reflexive
awareness; it is that which characterize conscious beings, hence lacking in what is
inert. A few lines on, he gives a further connotation to the concept by connecting
it to the idea that language is necessary to consciousness:
Furthermore, reflexive awareness’s essential nature is “languageing”, consisting in inner speech. This “languageing” is independent from any linguistic
convention and is an uninterrupted spontaneous savouring. It is like an internal nodding of the head; it is the life of the conventional sounds existing at the
Māyā level, such as “a” etc., because it is the internal support of a reflexive
awareness such as “this is blue” or “I am Caitra” and so on. Since speech
denotes, conveys, all things through reflexive awareness, consciousness is
said to be the “word”.11
By judging from these two last passages, the Pratyabhijñā authors seem to hold
a quite interesting view: the very fact that one possess a higher-order thought,
which is inherently linguistic, is the cause of the phenomenal dimension of consciousness. The point is to understand whether this affirmation is philosophically

Subjectivity and first-person stance 87
tenable, since it seems to suggest that is possible to combine a higher-order
theory of consciousness with the belief that consciousness has also a subjective
dimension.

Higher-order thought and qualia
We have so far established that the Pratyabhijñā thinkers conceive consciousness
in terms of high-order thought, but at the same time—and in this they differ from
Bhartṛhari—they point out that consciousness has also a subjective, phenomenal
side, indicated with the term ‘savouring’, camatkāra. If this makes their analysis
refined and compelling, it nonetheless raises a further problem, for it remains to
be explained how the belief in qualia (camatkāra) can coexist with a higher-order
theory of consciousness (vimarśa). To argue for their coexistence is in fact no
easy task, and in contemporary philosophy of mind, the two notions are often
seen as mutually exclusive explanations of consciousness. To have a plausible
answer, let us reflect on the relationship that exists between the four elements in
which the Pratyabhijñā classifies human cognitive activity: first-order cognitions
(prakāśa), higher-order metacognitions (vimarśa), qualia (camatkāra), and personhood (ātma). If we return to a passage we have already quoted, we can sense
that Abhinavagupta is putting forward a sort of hierarchy of these components
when he says:
A pot does not have savouring with respect to itself; it does not have a reflective awareness as a self, it does not cognize with respect to itself, nor it shines
as having an uninterrupted nature. This is why it is said to be unconscious.12
If we start reading the sequence from the last element, the author is saying that
a person (somebody whose nature is uninterrupted, meaning somebody whose
existence is temporally continuous, a self, ātma) is an individual who is aware
of one’s own surroundings, hence she has first-order cognitions (prakāśa) of the
external reality. These cognitions are conscious because they are the content of
higher-order representations (reflexive awareness, vimarśa) and because they
have a first-person subjective feeling (savouring, camatkāra). If the passage from
external contents to prakāśa and vimarśa is accounted for resorting to a higherorder theory, how to reconcile the vimarśa and camatkāra aspects of consciousness? We have indeed considered passages in which the two notions are explicitly
connected. In the commentary on the ŚD, Utpaladeva states that camatkāra “consists in the reflexive awareness of its own nature as it is”. In another excerpt
we have quoted, Abhinavagupta adds that camatkāra and vimarśa have the same
nature. Although these short affirmations are far from being a comprehensive
examination of the problem, they are more informative than they might appear
at first sight. I think that Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta are in fact suggesting
a specific solution of the question at stake, insofar as they are clearly affirming
that the subjective, qualia dimension of consciousness is inherent in the representational one. Using the Pratyabhijñā’s jargon, their conclusion is that whenever

88

Subjectivity and first-person stance

there is vimarśa, there is also camatkāra. But what do they really mean? Again, it
may turn out useful to look whether contemporary philosophers have argued for
similar positions.
As recognized by one of its most prominent supporters (Gennaro, 2005), a
higher-order theory of consciousness (HOT) can be attacked from two sides. In
the first place, it can be argued that if a mental state became conscious in force
of a metacognition directed at it, then one would grant consciousness to a lot
of things. As Alvin Goldman objected, if HOT was correct, even a rock would
become conscious, the only requirement being having a belief about it (Goldman,
1993). Therefore, from this point of view, a HOT is too broad. But in the second
place, a HOT must also explain the ‘hard problem’ of consciousness, the fact that
experience has an intrinsic phenomenal dimension. If it is not able to do so, a HOT
is actually too narrow, for it will not be capable to account for all possible aspects
of consciousness. The first objection is chiefly met by noticing that a metacognition operates on mental states and not on external, non-psychological objects like
rocks (Lycan, 1996, p. 24). The second objection, which is the one relevant to us,
requires more argumentative effort. Rocco J. Gennaro has elaborated a particularly interesting reply to the objection, though some features of his argument are
traceable to the work of David Rosenthal. The solution is based on the idea that
even phenomenal, subjective consciousness requires the presence of concepts,
that is, of thought (and language, we could add). Gennaro claims that phenomenal consciousness arises because the concepts we use are already presupposed
in our conscious experience. He conceives the process in a quasi-Kantian way:
we passively receive data through the senses, and then some of this information
is raised to the level of unconscious mental states. But these mental states do not
become conscious until they become the content of higher-order thought, that is,
of concepts. Gennaro is thus arguing that concepts are deeply intertwined with the
process of data acquisition, namely with the sensory stimuli. The crucial idea to
support his case is that concepts affect the way in which we experience conscious
states, even phenomenally. In this regard, highly suggestive is Rosenthal’s example of wine tasting: “Learning new concepts for our experiences of the gustatory
and olfactory properties of wines typically leads to our being conscious of more
fine-grained differences among the qualities of our sensory states. Similarly with
other sensory modalities . . . new concepts appear to generate new conscious
sensory qualities” (Rosenthal, 2002, p. 413). Another way Rosenthal puts it is
that if we remove concepts from conscious experience, what we get in the end is
no consciousness at all. We could summarize the position by saying that if there
are no concepts, there is no consciousness. In Rosenthal’s words: “It is plausible
that peeling away that weakest HOT would result, finally, in its no longer being
like anything at all to have that sensation” (Rosenthal, 2002, p. 414). It is clear
then that in both Gennaro’s and Rosenthal’s views, to be phenomenally conscious
comes down to the faculty of having higher-order concepts. As for the question
of why, we have a subjective experience in association with concepts—that is
the hard problem of consciousness—Gennaro’s reply is that the question itself
is inappropriate. In his view, a HOT is sufficient to explain how a mental state is

Subjectivity and first-person stance 89
conscious. To ask for more implies the desire to go beyond the “rock bottom brute
fact about the way conscious mind works”. In other words, Gennaro believes that
“the chain of explanation has already come to an end” (Gennaro, 2005, p. 11).
Is all this relevant to the way in which the Pratyabhijñā thinks of the relationship
between vimarśa and camatkāra? I believe so. Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta are
clearly moving along the same line. They see the two notions in question as the
two sides of the same coin and argue that the conceptual, linguistic nature of
vimarśa is actually what gives to conscious experience that subjective, phenomenal character they call camatkāra. There remains one last point to address. Even
if all this has made clear that the Śaivas elaborated a quite refined conception of
consciousness, the main purpose of Utpaladeva’s work, the defence of the notion
of self and personhood has not been achieved yet. The final question to examine
is whether and how the notion of consciousness we have been considering so far
can be used to justify the existence of an entity we are used to call self and which,
by definition, must have certain characteristics.

Notes
1 Bhartṛhari does not seem to be aware of the idea that mental states always involve a
phenomenal side, but his commentator Helārāja appears to hinting at the notion. In
commenting on Bhartṛhari’s statement that a ‘cognition of an object’ is different from
‘the cognition of a cognition of an object’, Helārāja says: “A cognition is determined
by another on the basis of a certain linguistic expression, such as ‘he had the cognition
of a pot’, but this knowledge of another cognition is not manifested for others as it is
for oneself, hence the [cognition of the cognition of a pot] is different from the cognition of a pot and does not determine it”. What does all this mean? Helārāja is here saying essentially two things: first, to know an object and to be conscious of knowing it are
two different things. Second, to know an object (i.e. to have an experience of whatever
kind) has a subjective feeling that is inevitably private and first-person knowable. See
the appendix for a translation of the entire passage.
2 Non-reductionist philosophers have criticized the materialist model adopting various
arguments. One is the so-called inverted spectrum argument. The idea is that is possible to imagine a world where the vocabulary two persons use to describe colours
remains the same even if what one person actually sees is constantly different from
what the other one sees. For instance, when the two persons looks at a banana, they
both say it is yellow. But the quale associated with the sensation of one person is the
one the second person instead associates with a tomato. If this is conceivable, then the
way we are conscious is not totally explained by physical process. A second argument
is that of the philosophical zombie. Since it is possible to conceive a person who is
functionally similar to normal humans but who lacks the phenomenal dimension of
consciousness (i.e. a zombie), then consciousness must be something over and above
the physical states of brain. A third argument is the so-called knowledge argument, or
‘Mary’s room’ argument, first introduced by the philosopher Frank Jackson. The argument is about a brilliant neuroscientist, Mary, who is imagined to have lived secluded
in a laboratory for her entire life. She knows all the theoretical details of colour perception, but she has never directly experienced what is like to see a red object. One day
Mary leaves the laboratory and sees a red rose. The question is: does this experience
add something new to Mary’s knowledge? If the answer is positive, as Jackson suggests, then to be conscious is again an experience that includes a phenomenal component, and it cannot be entirely reduced to the physical.

90

Subjectivity and first-person stance

3 ŚD 1.7cd-8: yadā tu tasyaciddharmavibhavāmodajṛmbhayā // vicitraracanānānākār
yasṛṣṭipravartane / bhavaty unmukhitā cittā secchāyāḥ prathamā tuṭiḥ // See Nemec
(2011, p. 283).
4 tathāsvarūpaparāmarśarūpa. See Nemec (2011, p. 283).
5 svabhāvam avabhāsasya vimarśaṃ vidur anyathā / prakāśo ‘rthoparakto ‘pi
sphaṭikādijaḍopamā // (ĪPK 1.5.11). Utpaladeva also mentions camatkāra/camatkṛiti
in ĪPVṛ 4.1 and 4.6.
6 bhuñjānasyādbhūtabhogaspandāviṣṭasya ca manaḥkaraṇaṃ camatkāra iti (ABh I,
p. 278). Gnoli’s reading is as follows: bhuñjānasyādbhūtabhogaspandāviṣṭasya ca
camataḥ karaṇaṃ camatkāra iti. See Gnoli (1968, pp. 58–59).
7 The passage is discussed by Bansat-Boudon (2011, pp. 320–321).
8 camatkṛtir hi bhuñjānasya yā kriyā bhogasamāpattimayānandaḥ (ĪPVV II, p. 177).
9 pūrṇa iti nīlādyasaṃkocito yo ‘haṃbhāvākhyo vimarśas tatsvabhāve yaś camatkāra
ānandātmā paramo bhogaḥ, tasya yā āpattiḥ prāptiḥ (ĪPVV I, p. 85).
10 cetayati ity atra yā citiḥ citikriyā tasyāḥ pratyavamarśaḥ svātmacamatkāralakṣaṇa
ātmā svabhāvaḥ. tathā hi ghaṭena svātmani na camatkriyate, svātmā na parāmṛśyate,
nā svātmani tena prakāśyate, na aparicchinnatayā bhāsyate, tato na cetyata iti ucyate. caitreṇa tu svātmani aham iti saṃrambhodyogollāsavibhūtiyogāt camatkriyate,
svātmā parāmṛśyate, svātmany eva prakāśyate.
11 pratyavamarśaś ca āntarābhilāpātmakaśabdanasvabhāvaḥ, tac ca śabdanaṃ
saṃketanirapekṣam eva avicchinnacamatkārātmakam antarmukhaśironirdeśaprakhyam
akārādimāyīyasāṃketikaśabdajīvitabhūtam. nīlam idaṃ caitro ‘haṃ ityādipratyavam
arśāntarabhittibhūtatvāt, pūrṇatvāt parā, vakti viśvam abhilapati pratyavamarśena iti
ca vāk.
12 ĪPK on 1.5.13.

7

Self

The previous discussion has led us to the conclusion that the Pratyabhijñā authors
have a conception of consciousness that aims to combine a higher-order component with a phenomenal, first-person perspective. Once accepted that these two
features characterize consciousness, it remains to specify what kind of relationship obtains between it and self. In other words, we need to examine the question
of whether a theory of consciousness of the sort we have reconstructed so far
is enough to justify the existence of an entity, the self, which has by definition
specific qualities.1 To better appraise the problem at stake, it is useful to recall an
influential classification of consciousness introduced by David Rosenthal (1986).
According to this model, a mental state can exist in three different conditions. It
can be simply conscious, which is the condition Rosenthal calls state consciousness; it can be conscious of a content, that is, it can be in a condition called transitive consciousness; or, finally, a mental state can belong to persons that are in a
conscious state, a situation named creature consciousness. This typology allows
us to recast the debate we have been analyzing so far as follows: the Śaiva are
accusing the Buddhists of conceiving self-consciousness only in a transitive way,
that is, intentionally. For their part, they believe that the defining feature of consciousness is state consciousness. Nevertheless, if they want to defend the notion
of a fully fledged self, they need to explain the relationship that exists between
state or transitive consciousness and creature consciousness.

Does consciousness implies self-consciousness?
A first strategy to corroborate the Pratyabhijñā’s thesis is to argue that state consciousness necessarily implies creature consciousness. In other words, one could
claim that ‘consciousness of an object x’ always involve ‘self-consciousness’, in
which ‘self-consciousness’ indicates here the awareness of oneself as the subject
of experience. The idea is that consciousness and self-consciousness, though different, are positively correlated. Now, such an affirmation is quite contentious,
at least for two reasons. First, it has a strong idealistic flavour,2 and, second, it
implies a conflation of consciousness and self-consciousness, which are concepts
a good number of contemporary philosophers prefer to keep distinguished. Most
would in fact argue that ‘to be conscious of an event or a thing’ does not imply ‘to

92

Self

be self-conscious of it’. The fact that I am aware of the book in front of me does
not entail that I am automatically aware of having that awareness. Being aware of
the awareness would require a further effort of the mind, which must be directed at
itself. But normally, the argument goes on, cognitions do not work that way. I usually perceive the book in front of me without being conscious of having the perception. Therefore, consciousness and self-consciousness should be regarded as
independent phenomena.3 Still, the Pratyabhijñā argues precisely for the opposite
thesis. Utpaladeva claims that a state of awareness, a cognition, always implies
self-awareness, as well as the notion of ‘I’. He would say that when I am conscious of the book in front of me, I am also conscious of myself having the cognition, at least to some degree. At first glance, the position looks like indefensible.
Yet a contemporary philosopher, Uriah Kriegel (2004), has supported a similar
notion. It is therefore worth considering his arguments and evaluate whether they
are helpful to understand what the Pratyabhijñā philosophers intended.
According to Kriegel, consciousness is an ambiguous concept, for it possesses
both intrinsic and relational modes. The sentence ‘Caitra is conscious’ is an example of the intrinsic mode. In it there is an intrinsic property attributed to a person.4
Kriegel defines this condition intransitive consciousness. The sentence ‘Caitra is
conscious of a pot’ is, on the contrary, an example of the relational mode. In it we
detect a relational property whereby a subject takes something as an object. Such
a condition is defined transitive consciousness. In addition, adopting Rosenthal’s
scheme, Kriegel distinguishes between consciousness belonging to individuals,
creature consciousness, and consciousness belonging to mental states, state consciousness. He then combines these different aspects, thus arriving at the following fourfold classification of consciousness:
1
2
3
4

intransitive creature consciousness, e.g. ‘Caitra is conscious’
transitive creature consciousness, e.g. ‘Caitra is conscious of his new pot’
transitive state consciousness, e.g. ‘Caitra’s thought is conscious of his
new pot’
intransitive state consciousness, e.g. ‘Caitra’s thought that his pot is new is
conscious’

Kriegel’s next move is to show that creature consciousness ultimately depends
on state consciousness. The main reason he gives is that to be conscious, an individual must at least have one conscious mental state. If this is true, to possess
mental states is a requirement for being conscious as individuals. The second step
of the argumentation consists of proving that in the case of state consciousness, all
transitive mental states depend on intransitive ones. As to this, Kriegel argues that
to ‘be conscious of’ one must be ‘conscious’ beforehand. If that were not the case,
we would get stuck in the irritating condition in which one can be conscious of
something, say a chair, both consciously and unconsciously—an affirmation that
sounds quite counterfactual. Therefore, a preliminary conclusion is that the first
three kinds of consciousness all depend on the fourth one. That is to say, all types
of consciousness entail intransitive state consciousness.

Self 93
Kriegel then aims to demonstrate that intransitive state consciousness depends
on some form of self-consciousness. If this is proved to be true, the conclusion
will be that all kinds of consciousness depend on self-consciousness. First, Kriegel
recognizes that the very same fourfold classification of consciousness applies to
self-consciousness too. So we have:
5
6
7
8

intransitive creature self-consciousness, e.g. ‘Caitra is self-conscious’
transitive creature self-consciousness, e.g. ‘Caitra is self-conscious of his
new pot’
transitive state self-consciousness, e.g. ‘Caitra’s thought is self-conscious of
his new pot’
intransitive state self-consciousness, e.g. ‘Caitra’s thought that his pot is new
is self-conscious’

Now Kriegel’s crucial claim is that affirmations 7 and 8 describe different states
of affairs. In 7, the mental state of a given individual is conscious of possessing a
certain awareness. Hence, self-consciousness here consists in being conscious of
another consciousness. The latter is the content of the former, and this is why we
talk about a mental state having a transitive property. By contrast, in affirmation 8,
self-consciousness does not take consciousness as its content but modifies it in a
self-conscious manner. Affirmation 8 can be recast in a more conspicuous way by
saying that ‘Caitra’s thought self-consciously thinks to his new pot’.
In justifying the difference between the transitive and intransitive types of selfconsciousness, Kriegel adopts the widely accepted distinction between foveal and
peripheral attention. If we return to the case of consciousness, one is in transitive
state consciousness when she is focally, or foveally, attending to her own mental
states. By contrast, one is in intransitive state consciousness when she is attending something else and is only peripherally aware of the mental state she is in.
Peripheral awareness is the condition in which we focus our sensory attention on
one thing, yet we are not totally unaware of other phenomena. Think, for instance,
to the case of reading a book. Our foveal attention is on the page, but at the same
time we are also peripherally aware of other objects in our field of vision, like
the glass on the table, the sounds coming from the streets, or the heating from the
fire. The question is whether the distinction between foveal and peripheral awareness, which seems so evident in the case of sensory perceptions, is also valid for
conceptual contents. Kriegel argues that it is so, by appealing to the example of
a truck driver who, though focused on the road, has meanwhile myriad thoughts
of which she is only peripherally aware. Then if the distinction between foveal
and peripheral attention is legitimate for both sensory and mental experiences the
point is whether we should make an exception for just one thing, that is, the cognition of self. Probably not. Hence, it is legitimate to differentiate between foveal or
transitive self-consciousness and peripheral or intransitive one.
As anticipated, Kriegel’s final aim is to show that all forms of consciousness
depend on intransitive state self-consciousness. In this regard, he puts forward
two arguments. The first is essentially negative. It is true, he argues, that when

94

Self

we look at the sunrise, we are not necessarily conscious of ourselves looking but
only of the content of our sensory awareness, the sunrise. Yet this affirmation is
valid only if we restrict our notion of self-consciousness to the transitive type. In
fact, if we conceive self-consciousness in intransitive terms, self-consciousness
is always at work, acting as a modifier of all types of consciousness, that is, of
all cognitions. The second argument Kriegel advances is based on the idea that a
mental state must be first-person knowable in order to be conscious. Still, firstperson experiences are always those we have self-consciously. Hence, conscious
states, that is, the ones produced by cognitions, are intransitively self-conscious.
Finally, we must also distinguish between particular mental states and type mental states. Particular mental states cannot be thought of without including their
subject in the picture, since they always involve an awareness of ourselves as the
subjects of those mental states. One could make the hypothesis that it is possible
to make an abstraction by thinking in terms of type mental states. For instance,
we can imagine the mental state another person has when she is watching the sunrise. Nevertheless, this is precisely an abstraction, and normally cognitions do not
work this way. We can certainly make an effort and imagine what the mental state
a person has when she is watching the sunrise, but we cannot ever know ‘what it
is like to be’ watching the sunrise for others. This is in fact a particular experience
that entails intransitive consciousness. Eventually, Kriegel’s conclusion is that
consciousness presupposes self-consciousness, more specifically a certain kind of
it, the intransitive state type.
It goes without saying that Kriegel’s model cannot be applied tout court to the
Pratyabhijñā’s case, but I believe his arguments are helpful to clarify some key
points of the Śaivas’ view. One of them is precisely the thesis that any cognition
involves an awareness of the knowing subject. Kriegel’s arguments show that
notion is rationally defensible, and it does not necessarily call for an idealistic
viewpoint. In this view, the subjective aspect of consciousness always affects and
modifies the way in which a cognition takes place.
A second aspect concerns the idea on which the Śaivas (and this book) insist
repeatedly, namely that a cognition cannot be objectified.5 The notion becomes
evident if thought in terms of intransitive and transitive self-consciousness. All
mental states possess both an intransitive and a transitive (or intentional) mode,
which occur at the same time. The Pratyabhijñā thinkers emphasize that the
intransitive aspect of a mental state can never be the content of another, as it is
absolutely subjective. But this does not mean that a mental state cannot transitively have another one as its content.6
A final point concerns the distinction between state and creature self-­
consciousness, which greatly helps to understand Pratyabhijña’s conception of
subjectivity. We have seen that for the Śaiva authors, any given mental state possesses an ineliminable, subjective dimension, which they indicate with the expression camatkāra, a concept that reminds Kriegel’s intransitive state consciousness.
This primary seed of subjectivity is then progressively engrossed into the concepts
of self and personhood, that is, into creature consciousness. The picture is clearly
detectable in a stanza we have already quoted, ĪPK 1.5.17, where ­Utpaladeva
distinguishes between the nature of the self (intransitive state consciousness,

Self 95
camatkāra) and the notion of ‘I’ (creature consciousness, ātma), with the latter
presupposing the former. In the end, it is only because there is an underlying
subjective feeling of the experience that one can come up with the notion of ‘I’.7
That said, it remains somewhat unclear how the passage from state to creature
consciousness takes place. A Buddhist would in fact point out that the move is
unwarranted. The Pratyabhijñā thinkers, on the one hand, would reply that the
existence of a self is proved by an analysis of how memory works. More specifically, by the necessity to explain the existence of coordinated, higher-order cognitions which are unthinkable without positing the notion of personhood. Still, they
would also argue that the difference between state and creature consciousness
is just supposed, because they are essentially the same thing, an affirmation that
will be clearer later in this chapter after the discussion of the notion that for the
Pratyabhijñā consciousness is in the end ubiquitous.

What is a self? Indian views
In a brilliant book devoted to question of self in classical Indian philosophy, Jonardon Ganeri (2012) introduced an ingenious taxonomy of the ways the notion was
dealt with by Indian schools and thinkers and has interpreted their positions in the
light of the contemporary analytic debate. Ganeri builds his classification upon
a preliminary distinction between the owner or the ‘place’ of experience and the
ontological realizers of this ownership, the ‘base’ of experience. The two concepts
are traced back to the Sanskrit distinction between ādhāra and āśraya. Against
this background, Ganeri enlists eleven modes of conceiving the notion of self,
each grounded on different interpretations of what place and base are. He groups
the first three models together, labelling them as the ‘One-Dimensional Views’. In
all these views, place and base are not distinguished. The first One-Dimensional
View is the Cartesian one, in which the self is both the owner of the experience
and the base for its realization. The second is the Materialist stance in which the
body is both place and base of experience. Finally comes the Reductionist position according to which a stream of mental contents is both the place and the base
of experience (a position defended for instance in Parfit, 1986). The next item in
Ganeri’s taxonomy are the ‘Real-Self Views’. These views regard the self as real
but distinguish between place and base. The first type is the ‘Ownership View’,
whereby the self is the place of experience and the body is the ontological base.
The second is the ‘Phenomenal View’, according to which the self is the place and
the stream of mental items its base. Finally, there is a ‘Pure-Consciousness View’,
in which the self is the place but there is no base. Then comes another group of
three labelled as ‘No-Place Views’. They are all characterized by the rejection of
the idea of place, that is, of somebody owning experience, and by conceiving the
base differently. The first view claims that the base is the body; the second one that
it is the stream of mental items; the third and most extreme one claims that there
is no base at all. Finally come two positions which Ganeri calls the “Flame View”
and the “Tornado View”. They are both versions of emergentism. The idea at the
basis of both views is that a dynamical system, when it reaches a sufficient level
of complexity, displays properties that are absent at the micro level and which

96

Self

emerge only on the macro one. In the Flame View, the micro states are fused
and transformed into something else so that they are not any longer exhibited at
the macro level. The simile is precisely the flame. In a fire, the fuel produces the
flames, the macro state, by a process of fusion and transformation. In the Tornado
View, conversely, the macro state still exhibits the basic elements of the micro
state, though it retains its autonomy. In a hurricane, the components of the micro
state, molecules of air and water, are still present at the macro level. Both models,
the Flame View and the Tornado View, can be applied to the emergence of mental
contents starting from material items. In the Tornado View, the stream of mental
contents is place, and the body is regarded as base. In the Flame View, the stream
is place, but there is no base.
Now much of Ganeri’s efforts are directed at showing that many of these different understanding of self are displayed in the works of Indian philosophers.
Some of them are quite evident. The No-Place Views corresponds to the way
Buddhism has dealt with the question over time. All Buddhists deny the existence
of place and therefore the possibility that someone or something can own experience. Still, they differ as to the ontological base of mental contents. The first view,
according to which the base is the body, is that of the Abhidharma, whose basic
contention is that subjectivity can eventually be traced back to the five skandhas.
The second, which claims that the base is the stream, is the standard Yogācāra
position. The third, which negates the existence of a base too, corresponds to the
Madhyamaka’s tenets. Less evident but convincingly argued is the ascription to
the Pudgalavādins of a Flame View, to the Nyāya of an Ownership View and to
the Cārvāka of a Materialist View. Finally, the Pure Consciousness View is attributed to Indian idealists. Ganeri mentions explicitly the cases of Advaita Vedānta
and the Kashmiri Śaivas, a term he uses to indicate both the Pratyabhijñā and
the Śaiva-Siddhānta’s philosophy of Rāmakaṇṭha. Ganeri is generally not sympathetic with these views, for they are open to a couple of serious objections. The
first is that idealists uphold a notion of self that is strongly attenuated. In other
words, they maintain a notion of self that is so basic and ‘thin’ that it becomes
scarcely recognizable as self. Normally, the answer to the attenuation problem is
to conceive the self as an entity that enjoys some level of embodiment. The second
issue raised by Ganeri is that a Pure-Consciousness View, in which no ontological base grounds the notion of self, is inadequate to explain the existence of other
minds and therefore falls into the trap of solipsism. Let us consider whether these
objections can be overcome and whether, in the end, the Pratyabhijñā’s position
can really be categorized as a Pure-Consciousness View.

The problem of attenuation
The problem of attenuation is indeed a critical one. Its original formulation is due
to Peter Strawson, who wrote:
From within our actual conceptual scheme, each of us can quite intelligibly
conceive of his or her individual survival of bodily death. . . . One has simply
to think of oneself as having thoughts and memories as at present, visual

Self 97
and auditory experiences largely as at present, even, perhaps—though this
involves certain complications—some quasi-tactual and organic sensations
as at present, whilst (a) having no perceptions of a body related to one’s experience as one’s own body is, and (b) having no power of initiating changes
in the physical condition of the world. . . . Condition (a) must be expanded
by adding that no one else exhibits reactions indicating that he perceives a
body at the point which one’s body would be occupying if one were seeing
and hearing in an embodied state from the point from which one is seeing
and hearing in a disembodied state. One could, of course, imagine condition
(a) being fulfilled, in both its parts, without condition (b) being fulfilled. This
would be a rather vulgar fancy, in the class of the table-tapping spirits with
familiar voices. But suppose we take disembodiment strictly in the sense that
we imagine both (a) and (b) fulfilled. Then two consequences follow. . . . The
first is that the strictly disembodied individual is strictly solitary, and it must
remain for him indeed an utterly empty, though not meaningless, speculation, as to whether there are any other members of his class. The other, and
less commonly noticed point, is that in order to retain his idea of himself as
an individual, he must always think of himself as disembodied, as a former
person. . . . At the limit of attenuation there is, from the point of view of his
survival as an individual, no difference between the continuance of experience and its cessation.
(Strawson, 1963, pp. 115–116, emphasis in original)
Strawson’s argument is clear: thinking of pure consciousness as a disembodied phenomenon does not account for the notion of personhood. If brought to
extremes, the idea of pure- consciousness leads to the counterintuitive position
that there is no difference at all between being alive and being dead. But, apparently, the Pratyabhijñā philosophers are defending precisely this kind of view.
They identify the self with a basic, atomic spark of consciousness, which is
claimed to be extended to all phenomena of reality. The point is whether this
atomic self is really the entity we usually mean with the word ‘self’. For when
we normally use this expression, we do not mean an extremely rarefied version of
consciousness but rather something with a good number of specific functions and
capacities. It is hard to find a better list of what a self is supposed to do—at least
for Indian authors—than the one Ganeri has put together. A self, if really exists,
must be something which has:
•

The capacity to ascribe to oneself mental and physical attributes, that is,
to think thoughts that are expressed in first-person present tense ascriptions of psychological state: “I am happy”. “I am thinking about going out”
[ahaṃ—pratyaya].
•

The capacity to be reflexively self-aware, that is for one’s thoughts
to be aware of themselves as well as their intentional objects
[svasaṃvedana]. The content of reflexive awareness is held by some
to be non-conceptual.

98

Self
•

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

The capacity to reidentify objects both over time and across sensory
modalities, that is to think thoughts that are expressed as “This object
which I now am touching is the same as this object which I am now
looking at” [anusaṃdhana] and “This object which I am now looking
at is the same as that object which I saw yesterday” [pratyabhijñā].
The capacity to have occurrent thoughts with intentional content,
including those associated with perception, reason and linguistic
understanding [jñāna].
The capacity to have occurrent memories [smṛti].
The capacity to have occurrent desires, dreads, pleasure, and pains
[icchā, dveṣa, sukha, duḥkha].
The capacity to anticipate the future, to imagine how it might be, to
make resolution [saṃkalpa].
The capacity to have dispositional traces, such as those associated
with long-term non-occurrent memory [samṣkāra, bhāvanā].
The capacity to feel emotion such as love, hate, regret, and sorrow; the
feeling of the emotion being distinct from the emotion itself [vedanā].
The capacity to sense proprioceptively one’s body [rūpaṇa].
The capacity selectively to attend to objects in one’s surroundings or
to own’s one mental states [vijñāna, manas].
(Ganeri, 2012, pp. 103–104)

Now, is a basic, atomic self capable of performing all these functions? Clearly it is
not, so at first sight, it seems that the charge of attenuation holds. Before returning to
the question, let us consider first the other problem Pure-Consciousness Views face.

Solipsism and the existence of other minds
If a Pure-Consciousness view is valid, how can one account for the existence of
other minds? If all that exists is a single, universal consciousness, how to explain
the fact that in ordinary experience, we encounter entities that look like us, that
is, persons having a mental life? It seems that there are just two ways to tackle
the question. But both imply unpleasant consequences for the idealist. One might
choose not to accept the existence of other minds, deeming their appearance as a
pure illusion. But then it remains to be explained how this illusion comes about
and how an intersubjective reality obtains. The other path consists in allowing the
existence of other minds. But, by doing so, the claim that exists a single, ‘pure’
consciousness would evidently receive a fatal blow.
The Pratyabhijñā philosophers were exactly in this unfortunate position, but
at the least they were aware of it and they tried to come up with a solution. The
question has thoroughly been studied by Isabelle Ratié, who has spelled out the
strategy of Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta and shown their effort to distance their
position on the issue from those of Buddhists idealists (Ratié, 2007). Philosophically speaking, it is doubtful whether this strategy is effective in rejecting the
charge of solipsism, but it is nonetheless essential to situate the Pratyabhijñā’s

Self 99
efforts within the coeval debate. Moreover, Ratié’s article contains more than one
hint at a possible solution to the problem of solipsism, a solution that we are going
to discuss in the next section.
The issue of ‘otherness’ is largely discussed at the beginning of the fifth chapter
of the ĪPK’s ‘Chapter on Knowledge’. In it both Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta
recast the debate on the nature of external objects that occurred between B
­ uddhists
thinkers of different persuasions. On the one side, the Sautrantikas externalists
defended a form of indirect realism. They believed that objects are known through
mental representations and never directly accessed by the knower; otherwise, one
would slip into a form of naive realism which is a position open to a good number
of counterarguments. Still, the Sautrantikas recognized that there must be a cause
of the mental representations we experience. And this cause, they concluded, can
be nothing but the external object, the existence of which cannot be perceived
but is inferred. Radically different is the approach of the Yogācārins, who, as we
have already seen, maintain that all that we cognize can be reduced to mental
representations, and there is therefore no need to postulate the existence of anything external to consciousness. Pratyabhijñā’s position on the question is clearly
closer to the Yogācarins’. Still, in the way reconstructed by Ratié, the Śaivas make
shrewdly use of the externalists’ objections against the Yogācāra so as to signal
the difference between their own conceptions and those of the Buddhist idealists.
Let us consider schematically the Sautrantikas’ objections:
1

2

3

The first argument of the externalists is that consciousness cannot be itself
the cause of mental representations, for consciousness is by definition unitary
and undifferentiated, whereas phenomena are multiple and determined. The
Yogācāra’s reply that the variety of phenomena is explained on the basis of
the mental traces any cognition leaves in one’s mental stream is not satisfactory, for one could further ask what is the cause of these mental traces.
The Yogācāra believes that the existence of other minds is caused by an externalization of consciousness. Other minds are not cognized as having bodily
aspects but rather as a stream of cognitions related to these aspects. To this
position, the Sautrantikas would object that it is actually always the same
consciousness we are concerned with. If this is true, these different minds are
only apparently different from the single, unitary consciousness. The idealist
seems therefore left with just two options: if she admits that there is no substantial difference between internal and externalized consciousness—in other
words if it is true that when I cognize others’ mental streams I am actually
cognizing myself—then she is plainly negating the existence of other minds.
On the other hand, if she admits that one’s mental stream can cognize that of
others, then others’ mental streams would end up being objectified, which is
not only contradictory in itself, but it would also blur the distinction between
perceiving conscious and unconscious things. What would be, in the end, the
difference between cognizing a pot and cognizing Devadatta?
Now a thinker close to the Yogācārā positions such as Dharmakīrti would
tend to favour the first option. He would argue that others can never be known

100

4

5

Self
directly, but their existence can be inferred from the fact that they act. The
concrete example he gives is the following: if my speaking is always preceded by the intention to speak, whenever I observe somebody else speaking, I must surmise that she had an intention to speak. Since this intention is
not present in my mental stream, it must belong to the stream of someone
else. Now this explanation does not explicitly negate the existence of others,
but it is something close. The reason should be familiar. In the ontological
and ­epistemological views of the Pramāṇavādins, whenever inference is at
play, we are dealing with a second-rate means of knowledge that is useful
for practical purposes but is eventually unable to grasp reality as it is. To
further complicate the Yogācārin’s position, the externalists portrayed by
­Abhinavagupta in the ĪPV also point out that the Dharmakīrti’s argument is
circular: the invariable concomitance between the desire to speak and the act
of speaking is valid for myself, but it cannot be extended to others unless one
does not beforehand accept their existence, which is actually what the argument is trying to prove.
According to the Sautrantikas’ view, an idealist is unable to account for the
existence of intersubjective reality because her position is founded on the
idea that there are only streams of consciousness that are mutually inaccessible. Dharmakīrti justifies the fact that we perceive an intersubjective reality,
that is, the fact the different persons seem to act in the same environment and
cognize the same objects as a mere coincidence, more specifically, as people
suffering of the same ‘eye disease’.
At this point, the Pratyabhijñā enters the debate and specifies the extent
to which their view differs from both Buddhist externalists and idealists.
At first sight, their position looks like quite similar to the Yogācāra. They
believe that nothing is actually external to consciousness. And they also
agree that the existence of other persons cannot be directly perceived or
inferred, because that would infringe the axiom of non-objectification of
cognitions. Still, Utpaladeva tries to overcome the problem by saying that
the existence of other minds is not known (i.e. it is not either perceived or
inferred) but ‘guessed’. Abhinavagupta elaborates on the notion by resorting
to a distinction between two types of inference introduced by Dharmakīrti
some centuries earlier: there is an inference (called tadutpatti-anumāna)
which is based on a cause–effect relationship between the probandum
(sādhya) and the probans (liṅga or hetu). The classical Nyāya example of
smoke and fire is precisely an instance of this type of inference. I know that
there is a fire on the hill because there is smoke, and I know that between
the two, there is an invariable concomitance because the former is the cause
of the latter. The second type of inference (called tādātmya-anumāna) is different and is based on the essential nature (svabhāva) of entities. The example in this case is the relation that obtains between the birch and the tree.
Whenever I see a birch, I know that what I see is a tree: between the two
there is an invariable concomitance, the birch being by nature a tree. Now,
the Pratyabhijñā’s solution to the problem of other minds is based on this

Self 101
distinction. Whenever we see actions produced by other bodies, we surmise
the existence of other subjects not on the basis of an inference of the first
type. In that case, the axiom of non-objectification would be infringed. It is
rather an instance of a svabhāva inference, whereby the relation is established between things that belong to the same kind. The original idea is
precisely this: the act of myself cognizing the actions of seemingly other
persons is no different in nature by the action themselves. Abhinavagupta is
returning to the crucial idea that we have discussed at length in Chapter 3
whereby the fundamental nature of a cognition consists in its self-reflexive
awareness. This self-reflexive awareness is a high-order phenomenon, but
it is also, crucially, an action. The Pratyabhijñā thinkers therefore argue that
there is no substantial difference between acting and knowing: the visible
actions of other bodies are just the final stage (paryanta) of the process of
concretization of consciousness.
Is all this enough to reject the charge of solipsism? Probably not. No matter
how one puts the question, the idea that in a purely idealistic view, whenever
one cognizes another person, she is in the end cognizing her own mental content
remains difficult to disprove. Ratié has convincingly shown how the Pratyabhijñā
tries to justify the perception of other persons adopting a top-down approach. By
doing so, one attempts to describe the conscious nature of all phenomena starting
from the conscious nature of the individual subject. Nevertheless, one might also
attempt to follow the opposite path, thus using a bottom-up approach. In this perspective, the individual subject is conscious because all phenomena are in some
way conscious. I explore this point of view in the next section with the hope to
further clarify the Pratyabhijñā’s position.

Pratyabhijñā and panpsychism
As Ratié writes in the article, we have just discussed, the Pratyabhijñā’s philosophical endeavours can be looked at either “from the point of view of the
universal consciousness constantly engaged in creating the world or from the
phenomenological point of view of any ordinary conscious phenomenon” (Ratié,
2007, p. 349). The first approach is apparent. The subject is identified with a universal consciousness that is instantiated in all aspects of reality. Still, this aspect
often overshadows the other, the one whereby all ordinary phenomena are actually conscious. Now I think that a more in-depth exploration of this aspect can tell
us something important about the worldview the Pratyabhijñā philosophers were
defending.
Concerning this, Utpaladeva explicitly says that consciousness is instantiated
in all reality, and by all reality, he really means everything. In his view, even a
material thing, like a pot or rock, contains in itself a conscious component: “The
external manifestation of things existing in the present is possible only if they
reside within”. The verse is shortly commented as follows in the Vṛtti: “Even
in direct perception it is correct to say that there is a manifestation of things as

102

Self

differentiated only if [these things] are absorbed in the internal knower ”.8 In the
ĪPV, Abhinavagupta expands on this by saying:
A manifestation of objects that have the nature of “this” in a clear and direct
way, has an external nature caused by their separated existence from the individual knower, which begins with Śunya and ends with the body, all products of Māyā. These objects are separated and distinguished from the knower
because of the power of Māyā, but are present within the real knower, which
is pure consciousness. And it is possible, i.e. it is logically tenable, to say
that these objects do not lose their identity with the knower. On the basis of
all this, it is correct to say that the power of knowledge of the Lord consists
in manifesting the existence of separated objects, whose identity which consciousness is thus retained, but which exist separately due to the fact that they
depend on the limited subject.9
Epistemologically speaking, the Pratyabhijñā authors claim that the existence
of external reality depends on the mental activity of the knower. At first sight, it
seems a rather explicit endorsement of an idealistic point of view, whereby all
things exist as mental content. Nevertheless, the ensuing stanza, ĪPK 1.5.2, says
something more gripping, as it explicitly states that, from an ontological perspective, all things have a mental component: “Without having light as its nature, an
object would remain a non-light as before. Light is not different from the object.
The essential nature of an object consists in its being light”.10 Abhinavagupta
comments:
An object is, for instance, a patch of blue etc. If the essential nature of a patch
of blue etc., were not its being light, if it were something else, and if the
essential nature of light were independent from the physical dimension of the
object, then it can be said, as a mere possibility, that a patch of blue would
be manifest to all, or to none, or that a patch of blue would remain confined
in itself. For it is logically untenable that an (independent) entity depend on
another one. Or it may not be either blue or not—blue in itself, because that
would be something impossible to establish without the assistance of light.
The same applies to the “manifestedness” of this [patch of blue]: it can be
for all, none or confined in itself. Or even not confined in itself. All universe
would be blindness.11
From these passages, it emerges rather clearly that the Pratyabhijñā philosophers are not only defending the view that consciousness is pervasive and ultimately identified with a universal subject. They also claim quite vigorously that
the conscious component of experience is not limited to the mental dimension.
It is actually ubiquitous and present in every aspect of reality, even in material
things. This side of Utpaladeva’s philosophy is often overlooked, but if properly considered, it has some consequences on the way we understand the philosophy of the Recognition. A first consequence of this interpretation is that Ganeri’s

Self 103
classification of the Pratyabhijñā as a Pure-Consciousness View becomes difficult
to defend. In Ganeri’s nomenclature, Pure-Consciousness Views are characterized
by the fact that they regard the self as the owner of experience (ādhāra), whereas
nothing functions as its ontological base (āśraya). All that exists is consciousness
in the form of mental representations. Such a definition may work for the Advaita
Vedānta, but I believe it is ill-suited to describe the Pratyabhijñā’s conceptions.
Actually, in the Śaivas’ view, the base is absolutely existent, and it coincides with
everything. In other words, Utpaladeva is claiming that the conscious component
of experience is realized—in Ganeri’s jargon has its āśraya—in all aspects of
reality. The second hermeneutical consequence is that I suspect that the best way
to interpret the Śaiva philosophy is to regard it not as a form of idealism but as
something close to panpsychism. Let me consider this hypothesis more in detail.
Panpsychism is the view that mentality is ubiquitous in the world (Goff, Seager,
and Allen-Hermanson, 2017; Brüntrup and Jaskolla, 2017). Despite being a position having a long history in Euro-American thought, panpsychism has received
much attention in contemporary philosophy of mind. The current appeal of
panpsychism rests on the difficulties faced by the two standard approaches to the
problem of consciousness. If physicalism fails to explain the phenomenal, firstperson dimension of consciousness, dualism, especially in the property version
which is nowadays mostly defended, is unable to solve the problem of interaction
of mind and body, as well as that of how to deal with the principle that the physical
domain must be causally closed. In short, this means that the causes of physical
events must be physical themselves: if one allows non-physical items (like the
mind) having effect on matter, one is going to open up an avenue to a myriad of
non-physical causes that would be reasonable to keep out of the picture. Panpsychism is appealing because looks like a middle way between the two options. In
agreement with physicalism, it affirms that the universe is homogeneous and can
be explained on the basis of a single, basic element. In accordance with dualism,
it claims that the mind is causally effective. More specifically, the panpsychist’s
solution consists in hypothesizing that consciousness is fundamental and instantiated anywhere. Just like many contemporary theorists of various persuasions, a
panpsychists believes that fundamental things exist at the micro level and that the
macro one is in some way dependent on micro states. In most cases, a proponent
of panpsychism is backing some sort of pan-experientialism. In other words, she
believes that the fundamental entities of the universe have a conscious component. This component then develops into fully fledged forms of subjectivity on the
basis of the laws of physics and biology.
Panpsychists are roughly divided into two main camps. Some espouse a version of the theory called ‘constitutive panpsychism’. Here the critical idea is that
facts about human consciousness and subjective experience are not fundamental.
They are rather constituted by facts which occur at the micro level. The upholders
of this view believe that conscious micro-level items, if appropriately combined,
produce the notions of self and subjectivity that are exhibited at the macro level.
The other option, ‘non-constitutive panpsychism’, is instead based on the idea
that conscious minds arise as the causal result of micro-level subjects. Different

104

Self

from the previous view, here the subjects of experience are conceived as already
existing at the micro level. There is a further distinction to make with regard to
non-constitutive panpsychism. Some philosophers think that fully fledged human
minds coexist with those micro-level conscious subjects that give rise to them and
sustain them over time (‘layered panpsychism’). Others maintain that when the
micro-level conscious subjects are combined, they cease to be detectable as they
melt in the macro-level mind (‘fusionism’).
The contemporary proponents of panpsychism think that their model has an
edge over dualism and various forms of physicalism at least in three respects.
In the first place, their theory is better equipped to deal with the so-called Anti-­
Emergence Argument. The main problem for emergentism is to explain how
macro-level consciousness develops from micro states that are unconscious.
Among others, both Nagel (1979) and Strawson (2006) have argued against
emergentism and claimed that the only way to explain macro-level consciousness is to suppose that it derives from more basic forms of consciousness: “For
any feature y of anything that is correctly considered to be emergent from x, there
must be something about x and x alone in virtue of which y emerges, and which
is sufficient for y” (Strawson 2006). In the second place, panpsychism looks like
promising in dealing with the issue of the intrinsic nature of the universe. Here
the premise is that natural sciences, physics in particular, are unable to give a
complete account of the material world. They describe fairly well the behaviour
of matter but are unable to tell us what matter is. The idea is that the vocabulary
of science is by definition relational and extrinsic, and it does not say much about
the intrinsic nature of things. A panpsychist believes that this intrinsic nature can
be explained by admitting the existence of mentality at the micro level of reality.
The third important argument in favour panpsychism is the genetic one. Panpsychists hold that the biological evolution of consciousness can be better accounted
for by their model, as far as it offers a seamless account of the phenomenon. Different from a physicalist, a panpsychist needs not explain the sudden emergence
of conscious properties from material ones and needs not specify the cause of the
emergence, nor at which point in time it occurred.
It goes without saying that panpsychism has attracted also considerable criticism. A first of objection is the so-called incredulous stare. To many, the idea that
matter, even though in its least observable parts, possesses some sort of mentality
sounds deeply counterintuitive. And even if a panpsychist is ready to specify that
mental properties are realized in matter only at the micro level, panpsychism is
often caricatured as attributing consciousness to rocks and electrons. That said, the
‘incredulous stare’ remains a weak objection, since there are countless examples
showing that the nature of things is often in contrast with commonsensical views
about it. A much more serious threat to panpsychism is the so-called combination
problem. The question boils down to explaining how the combination of microconscious entities can produce macro-state consciousness. Or, in the case of nonconstitutive panpsychism, how micro subjects can be compounded to form macro
ones. According to some authors (Coleman, 2014), this view is inherently contradictory for it looks like impossible to conceive a macro subject encompassing all

Self 105
the micro ones. The rationale is that a subject has by definition a singular and specific point of view on reality, a point of view that excludes those of others. If this is
true, how can one conceive a human subject as the sum of micro subjects operating
at the smallest level? Contemporary theorists have repeatedly dealt with the combination problem, spelled out the several ways in which it can occur (­Chalmers,
2015), and proposed various solution, even though the issue remains a most serious one for panpsychism. That being said, it is not our purpose to explore possible
solutions or to defend panpsychism as a theory of consciousness but rather to see
whether the Pratyabhijñā philosophers had something similar in mind.
Abhinavagupta’s passage commenting on ĪPK 1.5.2 that quoted earlier is
extremely telling in this regard, because it states a couple of fundamental facts
of Pratyabhijñā’s view of reality. In the first place, Abhinavagupta claims that
between light (which in the Pratyabhijñā’s jargon indicates cognition and consciousness) and objects, there is no essential difference; otherwise, we would get
two independent realities that cannot interact. In its own way, this looks like a restatement of the well-known interaction problem that besets Euro-American philosophy of mind since the time of Descartes. In the second place, Abhinavagupta
is also explicitly arguing in favour of monism. It remains then to see whether he
prefers to compound his rejection of dualism with a form of physicalism, idealism, or with something in between. The first option, physicalism, is obviously
not contemplated. But I think that also ‘pure’ idealism is not the best explanation
of what the Śaiva philosophers had in mind. This becomes clear if we consider
the second key remark Abhinavagupta makes in the passage in question. If consciousness were absolutely incompatible with the bodily, physical dimension of
its content, it would be a totally useless consciousness, for it would be contained
in itself and looking like a sort of amorphous consciousness that could belong in
principle to anybody, to none, or even be totally inaccessible—a prospect which
sounds untenable (and horrible!). It seems therefore plausible to conclude that
the Pratyabhijñā thinkers were endorsing a form of panpsychism, whereby the
spark of consciousness is operating at all level, even the most material ones. Once
this is accepted—and we have seen that the position is controversial—the passage from pan-experientialism to a proper notion of self, thus to an entity able to
perform the functions Ganeri enlisted, is explained in terms of an ever-growing
complexity in the arrangement of the micro-level conscious items. In a rock, this
arrangement is less complex than the one we find in animals, which is in turn less
complex than the that of a human subject. A similar view is put forward by the
Śaiva when they introduce in their nomenclature of reality (the so-called 36 principles, or tattvas) the kañcukas, the cuirasses, which are the factors that progressively hamper and obfuscate the mental and conscious dimension of experience.
If all this sounds reasonable, the oft-quoted sentence of Abhinavagupta whereby
there is only a single, universal subject of experience it must be taken with a
pinch of salt, I think.12 The author was probably meaning that the cognitive, conscious aspect of reality must be regarded as the file rouge that binds together all
phenomena. Not that the Pratyabhijñā thinkers were negating the existence of
other minds.

106

Self

It remains to consider one last point. The idea that panpsychism is the best
interpretation of how Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta conceive the world seems
to clash with the notion that I have thoroughly defended in this book, the one
according to which a state is conscious when is the content of a higher-order
state that is also language informed. In fact, a crucial requirement for higherorder theories is to suppose that some mental states can be unconscious. And this,
at first sight, seems to conflict with the notion that everything possess a mental
component. A first answer to this question has been given indirectly in Chapter 5,
where I argued that the Śaiva authors defend the idea that a mental state possess
inherently its higher-order counterpart. To this we can also add that some contemporary theorists defend a peculiar version of panpsychism that includes elements of higher-order theories. The particular form of panpsychism involved here
is dubbed ‘pan-protopsychism’, according to which the basic, mental features
of reality are proto-phenomenal properties. These proto-phenomenal properties
are able to transparently account for phenomenal (i.e. macro-state) ones. Here
‘transparently’ means that one can in principle deduce the phenomenal, subjective
qualities of a human subject starting from the proto-phenomenal ones (Chalmers,
2015). One of the most influential versions of pan-protopsyschism is panqualitysm. In this perspective, the fundamental notion is that the ubiquitous mental
components of reality are unexperienced qualities. These unexperienced qualities come to be experienced due to contingent factors. And one of the ways to
explain the passage from unexperienced qualities to experienced ones is precisely
to suppose the existence of higher-order thought doing the job. A position that is
defended, for instance, by Sam Coleman (2017).
In conclusion, I believe that we will do a better justice to the doctrines of the
Pratyabhijñā if we interpret the philosophy of the school as a form of panpsychism instead of idealism. Such an outlook will provide us with a more accurate
explanation of the difference between the stance of the Śaivas and pure, or illusory
idealism, as well as of the idea that for the Pratyabhijñā thinkers experience has
a ‘dynamic character’. In the end, this dynamic character comes down to nothing
but the notion that consciousness and mentality operate across all levels of reality.

Notes
1 The nature of personal identity has been discussed at length in Euro-American philosophy. Historically speaking, the first position to emerge is the Platonic conception
that the self or soul is a simple, immaterial substance that survives the death of the
body. This was the dominant view for centuries and it continues to be very influential to the commonsensical notion of self most people have. A second phase in the
reflection on the nature of personhood was opened by the work of the seventeenthcentury philosopher John Locke. During this phase, the conception of self as immaterial substance progressively dwindled, and personal identity came to be seen as an
ever-changing process of psychological and physical elements that are appropriately
(which most of the time meant causally) connected. Finally, there is a third phase that
started quite recently, in the 1960s, and it is still ongoing. This phase presents three
main developments. In the first place, it displays a tendency to refine the Lockean position. For example, Locke held an ‘intrinsic relations’ view of personal identity. In this

Self 107
model, what makes today’s person the same as yesterday’s is the way in which the two
moments are psychologically and physically related to each other. This view is nowadays almost often replaced by an ‘extrinsic relations’ view. According to this position,
the fact that a person at one time is the same as another person at another time is not
determined only by the psychological or physical relation linking the two persons but
by the way in which they are related to everybody else. An example may be of help: in
Locke’s intrinsic view, I know that I am the same person I was yesterday if I remember
having done things that yesterday’s person did. In the extrinsic view, I myself am no
longer sufficient. I am the same person that existed yesterday if everybody else remembers having experienced things that person yesterday did. The second development of
the contemporary phase concerns the stress on the question whether personal identity
is crucial or not for survival. The third regards the challenge modern theorists have
posed to the traditional three-dimensional view of persons, whereby one is wholly present at any given moment. It has been argued that we actually have a fourth dimension,
a sort of person-stage, that exists only for short periods of time. See Olson (2017).
2 The rejection of idealism in analytic philosophy is still largely based on the work of
Moore (1903) and Russell (1912).
3 An example from Searle: “Finally, consciousness should not be confused with selfconsciousness. There are indeed certain types of animals, such as humans, that are
capable of extremely complicated forms of self-referential consciousness which would
normally be described as self-consciousness. For example, I think conscious feelings
of shame require that the agent be conscious of himself or herself. But seeing an object
or hearing a sound, for example, does not require self-consciousness. And it is not
generally the case that all conscious states are also self-conscious” (Searle, 2002, p. 8).
4 In Kriegel’s paper, the examples are different. He talks of ‘Mr Smith’ and ‘cars’. I have
adapted his examples to the Indian context by using Indian names.
5 vārtamānapramātṛbhāve nāhaṃpratyavamṛśyasya prameyatvenedantā (ĪPKVṛ
1.5.17). “When it exists as a present cognizing subject, the object of reflexive awareness ‘I’ does not have the nature of ‘this’, a nature it should have as a content of
knowledge”.
6 If we claim that all our cognitions imply the knowledge of their subject, that is, of
ourselves, the conclusion is that all that we know is actually our own mind, which
is a problematic philosophical position known as solipsism. For Kriegel, this risk is
avoided by restricting the notion of self-consciousness to the intransitive type. See the
discussion later in this chapter.
7 nāhantādiparāmarśabhedād asyānyatātmanaḥ / ahaṃmṛśyataivāsya sṛṣtes
tiṅvācyakarmavat // (ĪPK 1.5.17). “From the existence of notions of ‘I’ etc., one should
not imply a differentiation in the nature of self, because this is produced in so far as it
the content of the reflexive awareness ‘I’. Exactly in the same way a verbal action is
expressed by personal endings”.
8 vartamānāvabhāsānāṃ bhāvānām avabhāsanam/antaḥsthitavatām ghaṭate bahir
ātmanā // (ĪPK 1.5.1).
ĪPVṛ: pratykaṣe ‘pi yāvad arthānāṃ bhedenāvabhāsaḥ pramātrantarlīnānām eva
satām yuktaḥ.
9 vartamānatvena sphuṭatayā avabhāsanam idamity evamākāraṃ yeṣāṃ teṣām, yad
etat bahirātmanā kalpitamāyīyaśūnyādiśarīrāntapramātṛpṛthagbhāvena hetunā,
bhinnānām tato māyāpramātuḥ vicchinnānām avabhāsanam tat paramārthapramātari
śuddhacinmaye antaḥsthitavatām tena saha aikātmyam anujjhitavatām eva
ghaṭate pramāṇena upapadyate, tena anujjhitasaṃvidabhedasya bhāvasya
kalpitapramātrapekṣayā bhedena prakāśanaṃ bhagavato jñānaśaktir ity uktaṃ
bhavati.
10 prāg ivārtho ‘prakāśaḥ syāt prakāśātmatayā vinā / na ca prakāśo bhinnaḥ syād
ātmārthasya prakāśatā // (ĪPK 1.5.2).

108

Self

11 artho nīlādiḥ, tasya nīlādirūpataiva yadi prakāśamānatā na punaḥ sāparā kācit
arthaśarīrottīrṇā prakāśātmatā tarhi yathā sarvān prati nīlam eva tatsaṃbhāvanayā
bhaṇyate, na kiṃcit vā prati, vastuto vā svātmany eva tata nīlam parasya
paranīṣṭhatvānupapatteḥ, svātmani vā nīlaṃ na anīlaṃ prakāśānugraheṇa vinā
vyavasthānāyogāt. tathā prakāśamānatāpi asya sarvān prati na kaṃcit vā prati api
svātmany eva, svātmany api vā na syāt it andhatā jagataḥ (ĪPV on ĪPK 1.5.2).
12 viśvaḥ pramātṛvargaḥ paramārthataḥ ekaḥ pramātā, sa eva ca asti. See Ganeri (2012,
p. 217).

Epilogue

To conclude this work, it is worthwhile to recall its three major purposes, which
we have identified in the Introduction. It is now clear that the first two aims—the
explanatory and the comparative ones—are deeply intertwined. My first basic
preoccupation was to make clear the essential features of Pratyabhijñā’s philosophy of consciousness, trying to separate the theological implications—which
are certainly present and are important in their own way—from the philosophical arguments the school offers to justify its views. Accordingly, I have tried to
evaluate whether what Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta claim is rationally sound
or not. The method I have used is a comparative one, consisting of presenting the
Pratyabhijñā’s tenets in relation to those held by contemporary thinkers, trying to
highlight the affinities as well as the differences. Pratyabhijñā’s overall conception
of reality, permeated as it is by a panpsychist approach and an equally strong religious overtone, is obviously far from the sensibility of a contemporary philosopher not to mention that of the twenty-first century man in the street. Still, I hope
I have been able to show that once one gets into the details of the arguments these
thinkers deploy, the feeling that one is dealing with a plausible if not convincing
theory starts to emerge.
In this book, we have broadly focused on two aspects of Pratyabhijñā’s philosophy, which are strictly related. The first is somewhat the pars destruens of
Pratyabhijñā’s thought, consisting in the rejection of the Buddhist notion of ‘nonself’. The task is carried out by bringing to extremes the notion that a cognitive
episode (mental state, mental representation, and cognition are all apt synonyms)
is inherently self-aware. As we have seen, the notion is far from being innovative or exclusive to the Pratyabhijñā’s milieu. Still, what makes a difference is
­Utpaladeva’s highly original and strict application of the concept. His strategy
reveals that cognition’s self-luminous nature is actually to be intended in two different ways. There is an aspect in self-awareness that is intentional and which consists in the capacity of a mental state to be about an object and, at the same time,
to be intentionally directed at itself. Still, there is another, more crucial aspect to
take into consideration. Here consciousness’s fundamental characteristic consists
in sentiency itself, which is a purely subjective, phenomenal, first-person quality.
As such, this latter aspect of consciousness cannot be treated as a content, for
it is always intention free. Pratyabhijñā’s rejection of the Buddhist construal of

110 Epilogue
subjectivity depends almost totally on this very aspect. The Śaiva thinkers contend that to imagine a situation in which the notion of real self, ātma, is replaced
by a series of mental representations linked one another by a cause–effect relationship is mistaken. These representations, these impressions or traces (samskāras)
left in the mental continuum, are in fact nothing but cognitions, and to believe in
their mutual interaction entails that one is accessing the content of another. This
might have been a defendable position if cognitions have had only an intentional
self-reflexivity. But the Pratyabhijñā is precisely arguing that once the subjective aspect of consciousness is correctly taken into account, the Buddhist position
becomes untenable. Put another way, it would amount to holding that consciousness is reducible to a mirror or a crystal, which just reflects passively what stands
in front of it, or using a quite telling contemporary example, it would be similar to
a zombie. It goes without saying that it is precisely this second, purely subjective
aspect of consciousness that Utpaladeva deems to be absolutely non-objectifiable
and the component at the very basis of the idea of self.
Despite the compelling interpretation they give to the notion of svasaṃvedana,
the Pratyabhijñā authors would have been much less philosophically interesting
without the strong pars construens of their thought. Utpaladeva and ­Abhinavagupta
do not simply argue against the Buddhist standpoint, but they also provide us with
a rather precise picture of what consciousness is. They claim that ‘to be conscious’
involves two different yet related stages. The first is that of a mental state which
is directed at a content or an event, which is grasped through the senses. They
refer to stage in various ways, but prakāśa, ‘light’, is the term most commonly
used. Still, this stage would not be conscious at all without a higher-order activity of the mind that operates on first-order cognitions. Again, the Śaivas refer to
this stage with different names (pratyavamarśa, parāmarśa, vimarśa), all of them
connected with the Sanskrit verbal root mṛś, whose basic figurative meaning is ‘to
reflect’, ‘to consider’. This already suggests that the relationship between firstand higher-order representations is not perceptual. Reflexive awareness does not
perceive the cognitions generated by the sensory stimuli; it rather conceptualizes
them. This leads to the conclusion that vimarśa is a conceptual form of reflexive
knowledge that involves language. We have seen in detail that the idea that language is required for higher-order representations can be argued for in several
ways. One can bring in the notions of LoT, that of reportability or, to appeal to an
assumption common to most Indian philosophers, according to which conceptuality always implies language. To use a contemporary designation, the picture just
summarized is a ‘higher-order theory’ of consciousness. With regard to this, one
can object whether an interpretation of Pratyabhijñā’s conception of consciousness in higher-order terms does not conflict with the fact that, according to the
school, a mental representation can never objectified by another. The doubt is certainly justified but the objection can be rejected. Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta
are explicit enough, I believe, in emphasizing that what is not objectifiable is the
purely subjective dimension of consciousness, not a mental state in itself. The fact
that the Śaivas have been able to identify such an aspect, which they have indicated it with the term camatkāra, is one of the most original contributions to the

Epilogue 111
debate on consciousness in premodern South Asia. The Śaivas were clearly aware
that there is a ‘what is like to be’ aspect in consciousness that is totally intention
free. The point, as we have seen in Chapter 6, is how to reconcile a higher-order
theory with the notion of phenomenal consciousness. The most effective solution
seems to be maintaining that mental states are self-representational. This comes
down to say that first-order cognitions are always accompanied by a higher-order,
linguistic thought that makes them conscious. Put another way, perceptions and
concepts seem to proceed hand in hand, so that the phenomenal and the intentional
sides of consciousness feed constantly each other. In addition to all this, the Śaiva
thinkers also put a strong emphasis on the idea that mentality and consciousness
are ubiquitous components of reality, thus embracing a form of panpsychism. In
a nutshell, their philosophical position on consciousness can be summarized as a
higher-order theory compounded with a panpsychist slant.
The third purpose of this book is to make fully explicit the impact of the
thought of Bhartṛhari on Pratyabhijñā’s theory of consciousness. As mentioned
in Chapter 1, the relationship between the two sides is a recognized fact. Already
in the 1938 edition of the ĪPVV, M.K. Kaul detected a good number of stanzas
Abhinavagupta quoted from the VP. The connection has been discussed at various
levels of depth by several scholars. On the whole it is rather difficult to downplay
the importance of the work of the grammarian for the Pratyabhijñā authors, and
scholars have focused on different aspect of Bhartṛhari’s legacy. Consider, for
instance, this passage from an article by N. Rastogi:
The idea of word as the creative principle, unity of thought and speech, world
of experience constituted by the powers of the word as the ultimate principle, speech as the basis and constitutive of the empirical world of purposeful
activities, vimarśa and anusandhāna (unification), not only in participating
in apprehending and communicating but also in ordering and coordinating
our universe of discourse (vyavasthā), language in its transcendental aspect
transfiguring into religious language par excellence, soteriology of language
leading to self-realization and language being the root of our literary, cultural
and aesthetic pursuits, all have been taken from BH [Bhartṛhari].
(Rastogi, 2009, p. 325)
The passage is pretty telling of how far-reaching the influence of Bhartṛhari
on the Śaivas can be interpreted. Nonetheless, these affirmations remain fairly
generic. In this book, I have tried to follow a different approach by considering
a specific case of influence, that is, the notion of higher-order theory, which is,
I think, the most enduring legacy Bhartṛhari left within the philosophy of the
Kashmiri Śaivas. One can finally ask why Bhartṛhari has become so important
for the development of the Pratyabhijñā’s philosophy. In principle, I tend to avoid
the question because it is easy to slide into the realm of guesses. And I also think
that is more instructive trying to understand how Bhartṛhari affected ­Utpaladeva’s
thought rather than speculating why. The reason is that we do not have decisive, textual information that can settle the question, not at the moment at least.

112 Epilogue
Nevertheless, scholars have tried to explain the grammarian’s impact on the Śaivas
in several ways, which are indeed all plausible. There is little doubt that Bhartṛhari
was well-known as an authoritative grammarian in the tenth c. Kashmir. Furthermore, as we have seen in Chapter 1, there is also the possibility that the VP’s
commentator Helārāja was somehow in contact with the Pratyabhijñā’s milieu,
in particular during Abhinavagupta’s life. Still, these considerations remain far
from being a proper explanation. In articulating the reason why Bhartṛhari was so
influential to the Pratyabhijñā thinkers, the best strategy probably remains the one
explored by Torella (2008), consisting in focusing on the change of attitude the
Śaiva intellectuals had towards Bhartṛhari in the generation intervening between
Somānanda and Utpaladeva. The shift in dealing with Bhartṛhari’s philosophy
was almost certainly caused by the different purposes the works of the two thinkers had. As already mentioned, Utpaladeva’s rehabilitation of Bhartṛhari’s after
Somānanda had poured scorn on him in the ŚD was related to the necessity to
counter the Buddhist ideas on argumentative grounds. Probably, Utpaladeva realized that the VP could provide him with a series of arguments he could profitably
use to disprove the ideas the Buddhists held on the nature of consciousness, subjectivity, and knowledge. In Torella’s words:
In order to undermine the discontinuous universe of the Buddhists he
[­Utpaladeva] decides to avail himself precisely of the latter doctrine, the
language-imbued nature of knowledge, which is meant to demolish its main
foundation-stone, the unsurpassable gulf between the moment of sensation
and that of conceptual elaboration, representing, as it were, the very archetype of the Buddhist segmented reality.
(Torella, 2008, pp. 520–521)
In a way, this book tries to qualify Torella’s statement by showing that the
notion that knowledge is “language-imbued” is built upon a specific theory of
consciousness, which the Pratyabhijñā thinkers largely inherit from Bhartṛhari. It
is only by reconstructing all the argumentative steps that make up this theory that
the idea of a ‘linguistic nature of consciousness’ becomes plausible.
In the end, are Pratyabhijñā’s argumentations sound? It really depends on one’s
own philosophical stance. If one is willing to accept that consciousness’s phenomenal quality cannot be explained by falling back on a mechanistic (i.e. physicalist)
account, much of Utpaladeva’s claims, though not incontrovertibly flawless, represent a serious challenge to the way in which the Buddhists conceived subjectivity
and self. Likewise, Pratyabhijñā’s huge emphasis on the ubiquity of consciousness
implies the endorsement of a panpsychist view that can be attacked in various
ways but which at the moment looks also like as a promising explanation of the
questions we have discussed throughout the book. Therefore, the final judgement
is somewhat reserved. As it happens with most of the contemporary theories of
consciousness, the Pratyabhijñā’s one is also waiting for the jury to reach a verdict.

Appendix: translations

Vākyapadīya 1.131–135 with Vṛtti1
In the world there is no cognition without the pervasion of language.
All knowledge shines as if pierced by language.
(VP 1.131)
[VPVṛ] Just like one has a verbal potentiality in a subtle form, in the same way
indeterminate knowledge does not produce any effect, even if it arises in relation to objects that are already known. To explain: even if somebody running
has a cognition produced by the touching of grass, earth, etc., that is actually an
indeterminate cognitive state. When in that cognitive state the seeds of verbal
potentiality becomes predominant and when the semantic powers that are fixed
for every meanings are revealed—being such words explainable or not and grasping the content—then the essence of the object, being comprehended and given
shape by a kind of knowledge which conforms to the semantic powers, and being
pervaded by language, it becomes a content of knowledge, and it is cognized as
having a manifested nature. That is to say, it becomes denoted. And this object,
if the linguistic seeds become manifested due to another reason, causes memory.
According to some teachers, the series of cognitive states of a sleeping person
is similar to that of one who is awake. But [in that former case] the seeds of
verbal potentiality enjoy a subtle state. This is why they say that this state is
obscure, meaning that it is in a condition of darkness. Therefore, consciousness
(saṃjñāna) constantly experiences manifestation and obscuration because of the
existence of transformations in that original nature which is linguistic.
If the eternal linguistic nature of cognitions were to cease, a cognition would
not shine, for linguistic nature comes down to self-apprehension.
(VP 1.132)
[VPVṛ] Just as illumination is the essential nature of fire, or consciousness
the essential nature of self, in the same way language is inherent in all knowledge. Even in inert conditions, there is a subtle presence of a linguistic factor.
The initial cognition, falling on external objects, manifests the objects’ essential
nature without grasping its features, but it does so in an indeterminate way, as

114 Appendix: translations
‘this’ or ‘that’. Also at the moment of recollection—when a verse etc. is to be
remembered because the seeds of the original cognition are manifested—a vague
notion (ārūpam), which simply follows the original cognition, revolves in the
mind having the form: “I heard this hymn or that verse”. If a cognition were not
by nature linguistic, the vague cognition that has been produced, being unable to
contribute to another [cognition], it would not function as a means to the realization of the action of knowing. In fact, once there is a cognition of a bare object,
whose different parts are not functional to each other and are mutually independent, immediately after comes a unification, a synthesis, the production of a unitary
content, that is, the grasping of conjoined capacities as undifferentiated; all this
is connected to the linguistic nature of cognitions. Even in the case of a cognition
producing a purposeful action and specified by all qualifications, the linguistic
nature of cognitions does not cease to consist in the conjunction of different parts
[only] because one makes an abstraction of its capacities.
It is that which ties together all sciences, arts and crafts. It is because of it that
all existing reality is differentiated.
(VP 1.133)
[VPVṛ] Human activity, as far as Vedic and worldly matters are concerned, is generally linked to sciences, arts, and crafts. The activities of all other living beings,
moving and unmoving, depend on humans. Sciences depend on an intellect whose
essential nature is linguistic. In the making of a pot etc., the effort and the instructions of those who produce something that is to be produced proceed in agreement
with the linguistic nature of cognitions.
The linguistic nature of cognitions is the consciousness of all living beings;
it exists internally and externally. In no categories of existence consciousness
transgresses that [linguistic nature].
(VP 1.134)
[VPVṛ] On the basis of the fact that a linguistic nature permeates cognitions,
one can put forward a distinction between conscious and unconscious. He
says:
It is the word which impels living beings towards purposeful actions. If that were
to cease all this would be perceived as unconscious, like a piece of wood or a wall.
(VP 1.135)
[VPVṛ] Those whose have consciousness directed inwards have the awareness of
pleasure and pain, as long as there is the presence of language. The worldly activity of those whose consciousness is directed outwards is based on that [language].
Should it be absent, worldly activity will crumble. For there is no category of
existence that is not pervaded by consciousness, and in all of them awareness,
either of oneself or something else, is never devoid of an association with language. Therefore, there is no cognitive activity in which the power of words is

Appendix: translations 115
not encompassed. Some think that the cognitive activity indeed corresponds to its
linguistic nature. It has been said:
The word, that encompasses all forms, by manifesting itself in different forms
and which is handed down in all sciences, it is the supreme cause of all.
The differentiations of language like cow etc. that never transgress unity,
that are brought to the mind through language and are based on it, manifest
themselves as differentiated.
Those who worship language as having six doors, six bases, six cognitions,
and six eternals overcome death.
Vākyapadīya 3.1.105–106; 109–110 with Helārāja’s commentary, Prakīrṇaprakāśa
The universal resides only in the content of a cognition and is subsidiary to
cognitions. A cognition is never represented by another form, differently from
what happens in the case of its content.
(VP 3.1.105)
[Helārāja] While the content of a cognition is represented, i.e. appears, in the form of a
distinct universal, this is not the case for a cognition, which is never represented in the
form of a distinct universal, because it is always accompanied by self-consciousness.
In fact, the distinguishing mark of the content of a cognition is that its representation
takes place through another form, whereas a cognition is dependent on the content but
never becomes a content. Still, since a cognition is restricted by its content, we must
also accept that there is an ascertainment of identity between them, for the universal
which resides in the content of a cognition is not different from cognitions, because
the latter are grounded on contents. Now, being unacceptable that cognitions by nature
possess differentiation—for they are dependent, insofar as they are determined by
something external—such a differentiation must take place on the basis of an external,
unitary cause. For example, in the representation of a pot such as ‘this is a pot’, there
is an external cause; so even if there is difference [between the cognition and the content], it is right to say that there is a universal contained in that [cognition].
Why then does a cognition not become a content and is it not represented
through another form? [Bhartṛhari] explains:
Just as a light is never illuminated by another light, similarly, what has the
form of a cognition cannot be apprehended by another cognition.
(VP 3.1.106)
[Helārāja] Just as a lamp that illuminates a pot etc. does not require another lamp
to illuminate itself, similarly, a cognition illuminating a content does not require
a different cognition to illuminate itself, for its self-luminosity is established. If
a cognition were illuminated, it would acquire the nature of an inert thing, for its
nature of being an illuminator is what distinguishes it from an inert thing. Furthermore, if at the moment of the cognition of a content the illuminating cognition
were lightless, there would be no apprehension of the object at all: if a cognition

116 Appendix: translations
were not sentient, the content connected with that cognition could not be established. And [if the cognition is not perceived at the same time of its content] what
would be the use of a cognition occurring later in time? In fact, when a manifestation takes place, one could not have a knowledge directed at oneself such as ‘this
object has been manifest to me’, since at that very moment, the cognition directed
at oneself would be insentient. Therefore, a cognition is self-luminous, and it is
not grasped by another cognition, because the property of being a cognizor is
absent in a thing that is cognized by something else. Now, since there is no representation of a cognition through another form, the cause of the unitary nature of
this [cognition] is the undivided universal that resides in the content only. And it is
precisely because of this [universal] that one grasps an identity between an apprehended representation and another cognition. On the contrary, if the appearance
of an identity between cognitions were to be explained on the basis of a universal
inhering in them, then the notion of an external universal would be really groundless; [but] in fact, the appearance of such an identity is to be explained differently.
Being the contents of cognitions different from one another, [in their case] a unitary universal is justified. While in the case of cognitions it is correct to say that
they do not have a common feature other than themselves. There is no parallelism
with the objects because it has been proven that also this [feature] common to
[cognitions] derives from the fact the cognitions are differentiated, insofar as they
are determined by their content. So there is no place for universals in the realm
of cognitions, because it has been established that the ascertainment of an identity between cognitions depends only on the common form present in the mental
representations: so it is [eventually] proven that cognitions have a unitary form,
are self-illuminating and do not possess universals. Although the Vaiśeṣikās, too,
claim that a universal resides in objects only and is subsidiary to cognitions, they
do not hold that cognitions have a unitary form, nor that they are self-illuminating.
Nevertheless, we grammarians have another opinion. And, in any case, the view
that is put forth here has been acquired through a reliable means of knowledge.
Now one may further object: just as in a cognition such as ‘this is a pot’ one ascertains the pot, in the same way in the cognition ‘this is the cognition of the pot’, a pot
is ascertained as well. What is then the difference here? [The difference is that] if a
knowledge consisting of the cognition of an object were not perceived, it would not
be denoted by language either, because linguistic denotation is preceded by perception. Moreover, a cognition is not able to perceive itself through itself, because this
would contradict its own function. But let us suppose that a cognition, because of its
conscious nature, illuminate spontaneously the object even if it is unknown. Let us
admit that there is a difference to such an extent between this [cognition] and external
objects. [In this case the point is that] to know that cognition, another cognition is
required. But a series of cognitions is inappropriate as well because ordinary activity
is absolutely based on a firm discrimination between cognitions and contents of cognitions and because another cognition is irrelevant. With regard to this, [Bhartṛhari] says:
The cognition “this is the cognition of a pot” is different from the cognition of
the pot. The cognition of the pot comes down to the external object.
(VP 3.1.109)

Appendix: translations 117
[Helārāja] The cognition “this is the cognition of the pot” is a cognition that has the
form of a pot and so forth. When it is grasped by another cognition, as when one
says: “I had this cognition”, the cognition that is grasping another—namely, that
which has a cognition as its object—has features that differ from those of the cognition of a given pot, because it does not arise directly from the object. For only cognitions that are themselves content of a further cognition derive from the object, not
the others, which are [in turn] founded on cognitions. The reason is that there is an
intervention [of a cognition] between the two. A relationship of ‘apprehender’ and
‘apprehended’ is established due to the force of a similarity. But the cognition of a
pot appears in the other [i.e. second-order] cognition as having different properties.
Hence, it is not grasped [by the second-order cognition]. Now it might be objected
that, due to the continuity (anusaṃdhāna) of the element ‘pot’, the [apprehending]
cognition is similar to the [apprehended] one. But then the author says that also “the
cognition of the cognition of the pot comes down to the external object”, meaning
that it does not come down to cognitions. Therefore, a cognition is never the support of another, for it always shines by itself. This is the meaning of the verse.
Others explain: the cognition that consists in ‘knowing the pot’ is different from
the cognition of the pot whose object is the external thing: a cognition which is not
engaged with an object and is confined to itself is not conscious. Since the cognition consisting in an object like a pot—which is distinct from the former one and
arises from the apprehended thing—is totally subordinated to the apprehended
thing and refers to the external object. For if there is no illumination of an object,
the existence of a cognition will be groundless. So, even if one thinks in terms of
‘cognition of cognitions’ because there is no difference [between the two cognitions] in terms of awareness, it is nonetheless correct to say that the content of ‘the
cognition of a cognition’ is always the external object.
Others explain ‘the cognition of the cognition of a pot’ by saying that its object
is not the ‘cognition of a pot’ but that it has a different nature and is devoid of
form. For the consciousness-nature of a cognition is not reflected in what is imagined to be its cognition. The relation between apprehender and apprehended is
based on similarity. If that were not the case, since there is no distinction in terms
of awareness, there would be no rule to determine what is the perception of what.
But a cognition, whose content is an external object like a pot, conforms itself to
that very object and assumes its form.
Or again [Bhartṛhari] says: “The cognition ‘this is the cognition of the pot’ is
different from the cognition of the pot”. What is again the difference between the
two? The author says: “The cognition of the pot comes down to the external object”.
Even if this cognition is formless, it nonetheless conforms itself to, determines, and
ascertains the object in terms of ‘this has such a form’. But the cognition ‘this is the
cognition of the pot’ does not conform itself to the nature of the cognition [‘this is a
pot’]. In fact, by ascertaining the ‘cognition of the pot’ as a content, [the cognition
of the cognition of the pot] can at most ascertain that [the cognition of the pot] is
some form of knowledge; yet the conscious nature of [the cognition of the pot] is
not reflected in [the cognition of the cognition of the pot], as it happens in the case
of the cognition of another person. A cognition is determined by another on the
basis of a certain linguistic expression, such as ‘he had the cognition of a pot’, but

118 Appendix: translations
this knowledge of another cognition is not manifested for others as it is for oneself,
hence the [cognition of the cognition of a pot] is different from the cognition of a pot
and does not determine it. Having an apprehending nature, a cognition is manifested
by itself and is therefore said to be self-cognizing. It does not illuminate itself as if it
were an object, and it is never the object of its own activity.
Now, one may object that an apprehended object is not different from the cognition, and it is apprehended on the basis of a cognition such as ‘this is the knowledge of a pot’. In this way, it is precisely the cognition which is cognized. To
remove this doubt, Bhartṛhari says:
For what has the nature of a cognition is not apprehended as having that of
an object. Cognition’s own nature is not grasped separately from the object.
(VP 3.1.110)
[Bhartṛhari’s] refutation is valid also if one supports the theory that a cognition
is devoid of objects (nirākāravāda), for also in that case, there is a cognition that
represents another cognition in the form of a content, such as ‘this is the cognition of a pot’. This cognition does not determine the proper nature of the first one
in separation from it. Moreover, the manifestation in the form of an apprehended
content is not the proper nature of a cognition; it is rather a temporary qualification, just like the colours blue etc. are for a crystal. In addition to this, the subjective aspect of a cognition is not cognized by another cognition as distinct from the
objective aspect: due to the pureness of cognition, another cognition is not admissible. Hence, due to the impossibility of having a cognition, if the content is not
cognized, even what is supposed to be the ‘cognition of a cognition’ depends on
the content. The content exists as the representation, and is established as different
from that [representation], just as when one says: ‘this object is known’; this is
also the case of a cognition like ‘this is the cognition of blue’ since [that cognition]
is rooted in a blue [thing]: a cognition is apprehended as arising from a content.
Things being so—since one cannot grasp the conscious nature [of a cognition]
through another cognition—an analysis [of cognitions] in terms of universals different [from cognitions] does not hold. On the contrary, since there is no distinction between the objective aspect [of a cognition] and a cognition, the cause of
the comprehension [of the cognition] must be the unitary universal present in the
object. Therefore, when there is an objective aspect of a cognition that is identical to the cognition, positing another universal is useless, because this [objective
aspect] is grasped by another cognition precisely so [i.e. on the basis of the universal present in the object]. Nor is there a fallacy of mutual dependency: there is in
fact a difference of activity, since the universal contained in the object produces a
unitary cognition, and the unitary cognition expresses the universal in the object.
This is unquestionable. If cognitions are determined as identical without the postulation of a universal, the same does not apply for the objects, since cognitions
are indeed determined as identical on the basis of a universal [but] in the way we
have just described. One may object: if the cognition aspect is not regarded as
different from the objective aspect, [the cognition aspect] cannot be established
by itself. This is true: the objective aspect is always experienced in concomitance

Appendix: translations 119
with the cognition aspect. Nevertheless, there are [also] objects of pleasures to
be enjoyed, which follow (standard cognitions?), which are perceived as having
the nature of the seat of the sense of the I, and which have qualities different from
those (standard) objects of knowledge that are on the contrary detached from the
seat of the sense of the I. On this basis, cognitions are regarded as having a nature
distinguished from that of the object: cognitions such as pleasure etc., even when
they are grasped through another cognition, they are never cognized. This experience is established, and we have dealt with it more than diffusely. So the universal is
established on the basis of a reliable means of knowledge, and when denoted by language, it is capable of accomplishing a linguistic usage that deals with both visible
and invisible things. Hence, the existence of the category of universal is proven.2
ĪPK 1.5.11–1.5.19 with Abhinavagupta’s ĪPV
They say that the essential nature of a manifestation is reflexive awareness;
otherwise light, though coloured by the object, would be an insentient entity,
like a mirror and so forth.
(ĪPK 1.5.11)
[Abhinavagupta] If one were to object that in ordinary experience (iha), there is
an inherent difference between a manifestation which consists of light, and a nonmanifestation, which consists of non-light, like a pot etc., because they mutually
exclude each other, then it would be very difficult to tell ‘this is conscious’ and ‘this
is unconscious’, with regard to a pot and a cloth. But if you say that a manifestation
is what relates to a content and is therefore conscious, one could reply that even
the clay in a pot would count as conscious, it being in relation with the pot. If you
say that a manifestation does not consist only in the relation, but it is an illumination of a content, then the conclusion would be that light has the nature of content.
But it is not tenable that what illuminates something has a nature that is different
from that which it is illuminating. If a pot, though having a different nature, is the
cause of the manifestation, then the manifestation too is the cause of the pot, and
the pot should be conscious as well. But if you object that the pot, even if it exists
independently from the manifestation, [first] generates a reflection which resembles the manifestation, [then] this manifestation assumes that reflection and is said
to belong to the pot, thus concluding that the pot is conscious, in that case also a
crystal, the water, a mirror, etc. must be conscious, because they are precisely so
(i.e. they present a reflected image). But if a pot etc. and a mirror etc. are not able to
have a reflexive awareness of themselves as having that nature (i.e. as being affected
by the reflection), then they are unconscious. The very essence of consciousness
is indeed a reflexive awareness of that kind, in which internal and external senses
are unfettered, which is spontaneous, which rests in itself and gaze upon nothing
else. When the reflexive awareness ‘I alone, as essentially light, shine’ arises, then
one’s own consciousness thinks of itself as the subject, the content and the means of
knowledge etc., and does not require anything else. A mirror etc., on the other hand,
even when a reflection is present on it, requires a different knower to establish that
it possess such a nature; therefore, since it does not have a reflexive awareness, it is

120

Appendix: translations

unconscious. Actually, it is always the case that what precedes and follows the [time
of external] manifestation is conscious, because it rests on the reflexive awareness
of the I, which corresponds to the essential nature of the knowing subject as having
self-reflexivity. It has been said: “The attainment of a distinct reflexive awareness
‘this’ is a reflexive awareness that rests on its own very nature, that is, ‘I am that’”.
But the realm of Māyā, the transmigrating state of unwise people, is precisely that
intermediate condition which consists of objectivity and in which what is beyond
its extremes is not apprehended. It is therefore established that reflexive awareness
is the chief characteristic of the Blessed one. That consciousness primarily consists
of reflexive awareness is not only said by us but by other sacred sources too. Utpaladeva shows it with the following verse:
Therefore self is consciousness; it is the activity of being conscious, in the
sense of being the subject of such activity; it is because of it that the self is
different from an inert entity.
(ĪPK 1.5.12)
Reflexive awareness is indeed the chief characteristic of the self. With the intention to show that that chief characteristic has the nature of a cause, of a motive, the
self, though a substance and a property bearer, is put in the same case of the word
‘consciousness’, which expresses a property. It has been taught by the Blessed one
in the Śivasūtra: “The Self is Consciousness”.
The word ‘consciousness’ indicates a word that expresses the (chief) property
of self. The teacher has put the word ‘self’ in the same case of the word expressing a property in the sūtras: “the power of consciousness is unchanging”, “that
is the ultimate detachment of consciousness”, and “the subject is nothing more
than consciousness”. For it is called substance that on which all entities rest and
shine and which it is desired for the sake of causal efficiency. And if you do not
get angry, all categories, elements, worlds, and transmigrating condition exists as
such insofar as they rest on the universal consciousness. And the proper nature of
different categories that are themselves the substratum of properties like quality
and action rests on the essential nature of that primary substance, universal consciousness, which is the substance [par excellence].
It has been eminently shown that the word caitanya expresses the basic property of that universal consciousness, which is the background surface on which
the mass of innumerable qualities rest. The word is formed by adding an affix
expressing an abstract and indicating relation [to the word cetana], formed by
adding a kṛdanta affix, expressive of agency. Since [a relation] is perceived as
resting on two elements and since the nature of substance has been expressed
by the base, a different aspect is brought to light by the affix ṣyañ, which indicates the basic feature of the word cetana, that is, its consisting in the activity of
consciousness. And activity in consciousness corresponds to the activity of the
subject, to his freedom, which consists of unifying, separating, and coordinating.
It consists in not being confined to itself, like an unconscious object, in having as
its essential nature unlimited light, in being indifferent to others. And this activity

Appendix: translations 121
of consciousness is what distinguishes the self from an unconscious entity, which
lacks the freedom to unify, separate, etc. Having that in mind as the supreme
and most prominent aspect [of the self, Utpaladeva] could have said: “the self is
conscious”, but to play down the other attributes [of self] and to give prominence
to the aspect of reflexive awareness, he has said: “self is consciousness”. In the
kārikā, the expression citkriyācitikartṛtātātparyeṇa is a single compound. For,
the convention whereby the word connecting two half-verses must be contained
in a single quarter is valid for poetry but not for technical literature. Otherwise,
they may be read separately as follows: “the activity of consciousness and being
the subject of this activity are said to be the self”. But this reading is not found
anywhere.
Still one may object that ‘light’ and ‘non-light’ are confined to themselves, and
therefore it cannot be said that by using the word ‘light’, one indicates something
different from the unconscious. In the same way, also ‘reflexive awareness’ and
‘non-reflexive awareness’ are confined to themselves. So, how can there be a distinction between what is conscious and what is unconscious? Having this objection in mind, [Utpaladeva] says:
Consciousness is reflexive awareness, it is the supreme word that arises
freely. It is the primary freedom, the sovereignty of the supreme self.
(IPK 1.5.13)
The word citi ‘consciousness’ derives from the verbal root citi in the expression
cetayati, ‘to make conscious’; its essential nature is a reflexive awareness characterized by self-savouring. To explain: a pot does not have a self-savouring; it does
not have a reflective awareness, and for this reason it does not shine independently;
nor is it manifested as having an uninterrupted nature. This is why it is said that [a
pot] is unconscious. In contrast, [a person named] Caitra has self-savouring, for
he has the power to manifest a tension towards an elevated state, that is, the ‘I’;
he possesses reflexive awareness and shines by itself. A limited manifestation—
appearing as ‘this’—appears in such a form that it is different from the ‘I’, for it
is affected by innumerable [limited] manifestations like blue, yellow, pleasure,
pain, their absence, etc. Therefore, it is said that Caitra is conscious. Thus, that
both reflexive awareness and non-reflexive awareness are confined to themselves
is not at all established, for reflexive awareness is capable of everything: it makes
what is different from itself identical and itself a different thing; it brings together
both difference and identity and demotes both of them, which were [previously]
unified. This is its essential nature. Reflexive awareness’s essential nature is a
subtle verbalizing, consisting in inner speech. This ‘subtle verbalizing’ is an uninterrupted spontaneous savouring and is independent from linguistic convention.
It is like an internal nodding of the head; it is the life of the conventional sounds
that exist at the Māyā level, such as ‘a’ etc., because it is the internal background
of self-reflexive cognitions such as ‘this is blue’, ‘I am Caitra’, and so on. Since
speech denotes all things through reflexive awareness, [consciousness] is said to
be the ‘word’ (vāc). [The word] is supreme because of its completeness. Hence,

122

Appendix: translations

having a conscious nature and resting on itself, it arises freely, it never declines, it
exists permanently as the ‘I’. This primary freedom of the supreme self is defined
as its freedom, its sovereignty, its supremacy, and its independence from others.
But this [word] exists as supreme and non-supreme [also], at the stage of
paśyantī, at the level of Sadāśiva. In fact, even if a reflexive awareness existing
in terms of ‘this’ and lacking the knowledge of the self gradually arises, this rests
nevertheless on the ‘I’. Still, this [word] exists also as non-supreme. Those who
are within the realm of Māyā and for which the dimension ‘this’ is predominant—
such as Viṣṇu, Viriñca, and Indra—they gain their sovereignty from the grace
of the supreme Lord. Therefore, supreme beatitude, sovereignty, freedom, and
consciousness are tantamount to independence from others. Hence, it has been
said: “it is different from what is inert”. All this has been put forth also in the most
eminent scriptures, hence [Utpaladeva] explains:
Consciousness has the nature of luminous vibration, it is the great being, is
not qualified by space and time. It is said that this very one is in its essence
the heart of the supreme self.
(ĪPK 1.5. 14)
In ordinary experience, we ask, “Why does a pot exist whereas a sky-flower
does not?” People reply, “The pot is evident to me; the other thing is not”. Now,
if the very nature of a pot comes down to its being manifested, to its being associated with manifestation, then it should be manifest to anybody all the time or to
none. Therefore, what is the meaning of ‘a pot is evident to me’? It means the pot
has entered my luminous vibration, my quivering (sphurana). Now vibration is
a minimal movement, and here minimality consists in the fact that it appears to
move while it is actually motionless, for the essential nature of light does not to
change at all but appears to be changing. It is indeed motionless but shines as if it
were connected with a variety of manifestations. It has been said that: “The very
self, which is essentially consciousness in a state of lysis, when vibrates in all entities, is Siva, whose will flows unimpeded and whose powers of knowledge and
action are in operation”. And that: “Being extremely angry, or extremely happy, or
reflecting on what to do, or running, one could reach that state in which vibration
takes place” (Sp. Kā 22). And that “in order to grasp the nature of the vibration”
(Sp. Kā 20). And that “the emanations of vibration like the guṇas etc.” (Sp. Kā
19). In ordinary experience, too, something is said to be like a vibration because
of its numerous varieties.
[In the kārikā] the word sattā, ‘being’, indicates the essential nature of the
subject in the act of being, which is freedom in all actions. Such being is great,
since it pervades even the sky-flower. It emits time and space as well as the colour
blue etc., and it is therefore not qualified by them. For it can be qualified only by
that which shines as equal to it, as bracelets qualify Caitra. Space and time do not
shine at the same level of reflexive awareness, for it is untenable that in the case of
a cognition, there is equality between space and time on the one hand and reflexive awareness on the other. For the former have the nature of ‘this’, while the

Appendix: translations 123
latter has that of ‘I’. Thus, being unaffected by space and time, it is all-pervading
and eternal. Still, it is also in contact with all times and places because it creates
them. Hence, it permeates everything and is eternal. It has been said: “The great
being, the great goddess, is the life of all”.
What [in the kārikā] is called sāra, essence, is that aspect that is not trifle and is
indeed the power of reflexive awareness. This power of reflexive awareness illuminates the variety of things which are different from light but also that aspect of
subjects and contents of knowledge that consists of light, as it is made clear in the
treatise on the blessed essence (i.e. the Mālinīvijaya): “The essence of this world
is Mālinī, the supreme power”.
The expression “this very one” (saiṣa) is meant to indicate the recognition of
this power. The term hṛdaya, heart, means ‘resting place’ or ‘abode’. According to an aforementioned doctrine, the heart is the consciousness of conscious
beings because consciousness consists of light, and light has the power of reflexive awareness. In the various authoritative sources in which the heart is said to
be of the nature of reflexive awareness and consisting of the supreme mantra,
there it is regarded as the abode of the whole universe as it exists at the supreme
level. The heart of all things is indeed the mantra, and the mantra is essentially
reflexive awareness; the action of reflexive awareness consists in the power of the
supreme word. Hence, it has been said in the sacred scriptures: “Without mantras,
there is no word, no meaning, and no conscious awareness” and “Those who have
attained the state of the Mātṛika . . .”. Also the honourable Bhartṛhari has said: “In
the world, there is no cognition without the pervasion of language. All knowledge
is acquired as if pierced by language” and “If the eternal linguistic nature of cognition were to cease, a cognition would not shine, for linguistic nature consists
of reflexive awareness”, and again: “The linguistic nature of cognitions is the
consciousness of living beings, it exists internally and externally. If it were to disappear, all this world would be unconscious like a piece of wood or a wall”, etc.
On this basis, the use of the expression “they say” (in 1.5.11) is finally justified.
This interpretation is almost accepted by the Buddhists, too, who claim that the
truth of a cognition depends on mental determination. For a mental apprehension
consists in language.
One can object: why so much importance is given to this power of reflexive
awareness, if Paramaśiva is embellished with a multitude of uncountable powers?
To answer this objection, the author says:
Therefore he becomes an object of knowledge, but one which has no independent existence from him. If he only tended towards it, his freedom would
be lost.
(ĪPK 1.5.15)
The Lord, having fabricated out of his freedom consisting in non-duality
a self that is not devoid of that freedom, through notions like that of Īśa etc.,
brings ordinary reality into being.
(ĪPK 1.5.16)

124

Appendix: translations

All powers amount to the power of agency, whose essential nature is sovereignty. The response is given with the intention to affirm that the power of agency
consists in reflexive awareness, whose importance is hence justified. This is the
meaning of the words [of the stanza]: the Lord, who is essentially light, ­transforms
himself into a content of knowledge, even if it is not really so, insofar he is a
knower and nothing else. This is possible because it has been proved on the basis
of a solid inference that another cause is untenable. This is because of the power
of agency characterized by reflexive awareness. Since he is reflexive aware and
contains all things, he manifests himself so, as the colour blue, etc. One may
object: how is it possible that [the supreme self] transforms itself into a content
of knowledge? The reply is that an existence which is external and independent from light does not exist as the content of knowledge. The particle tu in the
stanza expresses emphasis. In this regard, reasons have been already stated. Now
the authors provides more reasons. If the content of knowledge existed independently, that is, as detached from the self of the knower, that tension toward the
object which is commonly experienced and which is self-evident would not be
possible. For if this tension is applied to a content of knowledge that is different
from the subject, then the latter would rely on another thing and hence would be
dependent. But being dependent is opposed to being free. Freedom, which is the
essential nature of the self, consists in not looking at anyone else. Therefore, a
self who tended towards a content which is different from itself would be no self
at all. The unwanted consequence of this is that an unconscious non-self would
not be able to have any tension towards a content of knowledge. Therefore, from
the opposite conclusion, the following is obtained: the self, being free and tending
towards something which is not detached from itself, actually renders himself as
a content of knowledge.
Contents of knowledge are not just the colour blue, etc. Having created a limited self which is not devoid of freedom and whose nature of subject is preserved,
[supreme consciousness] endows it with ordinary capacities like those of meditating, worshipping, praising, teaching, etc. This is brought into being on the basis of
what has been said in the previous verse. One may object: this limited self is free
but at the same time is created; is that not contradictory? The answer is that the
objection is unsound because of the freedom of the unitary consciousness which
“consists in non-duality”. What appears really difficult to achieve at the level of
Māyā, it is something an unobstructed freedom is actually capable to realize; this
is shown by the use of the word ‘freedom’ in the verse. The word ‘therefore’ (ata
eva) indicates the nature of the power of reflexive awareness, so it is not repeated
[without reason]. Alternatively, one can read the expression as “because of this
very freedom”, being thus in connection with both verses and having the same
reference. In this regard, the author gives the following example. The creation of
a self which is not devoid of freedom is not established in ordinary reality, as it is
that of the colour blue, etc. Still, since to those who know, worship, or meditate
on the fact that Īśvara is the blessed Lord, the self, eternal, all-pervading, and free,
the content of knowledge, worship, or meditation appears as undifferentiated. It
is therefore created but not as different from Īśvara. For if it were so, volition,

Appendix: translations 125
meditation, etc., directed to Īśvara and non-Īśvara, were the same. But they are not
the same because [from the volitions, meditation, etc. on Īśvara and non-Īśvara]
one gets different results. Hence, Parameśvara manifests itself as both types of
contents of knowledge: shining as devoid of freedom and shining as endowed
with it. This is due to the power of reflexive awareness which is therefore the most
important among powers of the Lord.
One can raise the following objection: the existence of objects that are mutually distinguished is due to light, and light is in essence reflexive awareness. Since
there is no difference between light and reflexive awareness, it is right to say that
this ‘reflexive awareness is that light’. But the reflective awareness of what is
created as in the case of notions like the ‘lord is the self, etc.’, has an objective
nature, while freedom consists in subjective reflexive awareness. Then if what is
fabricated lacks the nature of subjective reflexive awareness, how can it be “not
devoid of freedom”? To refute this objection, [Utpaladeva] says:
The existence of various notions like that of “I” etc., does not imply differentiation in the nature of self, because this is produced in so far as it the
content of the reflexive awareness “I”. Just like verbal action is expressed by
personal endings.
(ĪPK 1.5.17)
The abstract suffix [in the word ahantā] indicates its essential nature. The word
“etc.” stands for the notions of ‘self’, ‘lord’ and so on. The expression “personal
endings” alludes to the affixes that convey verbal action. The word “action”
alludes to what has the nature of power and it is not a substance. The meaning
of the verse is the following: the reflexive awareness which consists in the ‘I’
assumes the forms of ‘knower’, ‘self’, ‘Śiva’, and so forth. Although this appears
as having a mutual differentiation, it is nonetheless wrong to suppose that on
the basis of that differentiation, there is a difference between the self—which is
the cause, the creator, and whose nature consists in subjective reflexive awareness, and the notions of Īśvara, etc. For even the notion of Īśvara reposes on
that which has the nature of the Lord and whose essence is knowing and doing.
Being a knower etc. means freedom, independence from others, capacity of unrestricted knowledge; this un-restrictedness reposes on the awareness of the ‘I’, as
[in the sentences] ‘I know’ and ‘I do’. Hence, this self is produced, emitted as
the content of subjective reflexive awareness. Or in the stanza the word sṛṣteḥ,
‘produced’, can be taken as an ablative of cause, meaning that this Lord produces
what is capable of subjective reflexive awareness also in the forms of Īśvara etc.
In the word mṛśya, the affix ya conveys the notion of fitness.3 The meanings of
notions like ‘action’, ‘factor of action’, ‘coordination’, ‘option’, etc. are understood through the use of personal endings, instrumental case, and particles like ca
and vā. Even when a noun form is attributed to them, as in the case of words like
‘cooking, ‘doer’, ‘coordination’, and ‘option’, they nevertheless repose on a fundamental awareness that correspond to expressions like ‘he cooks’, Caitra, ca, and
vā. If it were not so, these would not be understood. This is what we have said: the

126

Appendix: translations

word ‘reflexive awareness’ indicates the place of repose. This culminating place is
truly real and consists in the ‘I’. The intermediate place of repose is, on the other
hand, like the root of a tree when one is proceeding towards a village; it is said to
arise in dependence to that [culminating place], so where is the contradiction? All
this shows that even if in regard to blue things, the expression ‘this is blue’ is an
intermediate type of awareness, it is indeed equal to the fundamental awareness,
because both repose on the ‘I’. For the awareness ‘I know a blue object’ is tantamount to ‘I shine’, as it has been said “of the consciousness ‘this’, etc. However,
since a confused person is illusorily satisfied when the awareness of ‘blue’, etc.
has a practical utility, it has been said that blue, etc. are devoid of freedom. But
as far as the self, etc. are concerned, even a confused person does not believe he
can attain completion and practical utility without reposing in that fundamental
awareness. And for this very reason, the freedom of self is not diminished even
if it is created.
One may put forth the following objection: if the nature of the Lord consists in
reposing in a unitary, pure awareness of all cognitions, how can one say that he
has the powers of knowledge, memory, etc., that knowledge is differentiated into
doubt, ascertainment, etc. and that there is variety of objects like blue, etc.? To
overcome the objection, [Utpaladeva] says:
Due to that power of Māyā that belongs to the Lord, this [consciousness]
enters the realm of cognizable, differentiated objects and it is called by the
names of cognition, volition, determination etc.
(ĪPK 1.5.18)
We define Māyā as a manifestation that cannot be accounted for rationally.
Māyā is therefore the entire spectrum of manifestations that differ from light. In
this regard, the power of Māyā is the freedom that pertains only to the one who
is by nature conscious. The realm, the place of repose of a consciousness that is
essentially reflexive awareness, whose nature is that of the supreme word, and
which is said to be ‘cognition’, ‘volition’, or ‘determination’, that realm is that
of [objects] that are cognized as reciprocally separated and separated from the
knower and that which that is cognized through senses that are different from
their content, from the knower and from one another. In the stanza, the word
“etc.” indicates doubt, memory, etc. To explain: perception is consciousness
limited by the sense grasping what is there and by a tangible external object;
imagination is consciousness limited by the mind and by a content which is not
tangible; determination or ascertainment is consciousness limited by the intellect
and by the object in its entirety. The differentiation between the content and the
external and internal senses is unjustified because there is no difference in the
light revealing them, so the differentiation is manifested by consciousness. Now,
since unity reposes in differentiation but differentiation does not repose in unity,
as in the case of Īśvara, Sadāśiva, etc., the various notions of cognition, imagination, etc. are said to be the power of that coordinator, whose essence is consciousness and whose unitary essential nature never fails. This implies different notions

Appendix: translations 127
like that of doubt, etc. and a variety of objects like ‘blue’, etc. All this cannot be
dismissed.
One might put forward the following objection: let us admit that consciousness’s self-awareness is present in the case of those capacities [of the Self] such
as will, memory, etc., which are conceptual. But in that power [that we call] perception, which is defined by immediacy and has a non-conceptual nature, how
can self-awareness be present? For reflexive awareness consists in the usage of
a specific linguistic expression, and such a usage requires the recollection of a
linguistic convention. This recollection is based on the reawakening of mental
traces, and this, in turn, on similar [previous] cognitions. So, how can a linguistic
expression be applied at the first moment [of cognition]?
There is self-awareness even in the case of immediate cognitions, otherwise
how can running etc. be possible, if [these activities] are conceived as lacking
a dynamic unification?
(ĪPK 1.5.19)
[Abhinavagupta] To begin with, in this world, the association with language is the
chief characteristic of consciousness, in a way that is comparable to the indication
of something with a finger, etc. Otherwise a child would not develop a linguistic
usage when he sees a human activity for the first time. In fact, a child first hears
the word in the form of a series of non-conceptual cognitions, then he sees the
object [of the word] before his eyes, and after that he sees a surface in which
the object is no more present. On hearing linguistic expressions such as “bring the
pot” or “carry the pot”, how can in the heart of the child shine the idea “this is the
meaning of that”, namely this is the meaning of the word “pot”, this is the meaning of the word “bring” and of the word “carry”? Because to say that this object is
the meaning [of that word] is essentially an act of unification, and unification is a
conceptual activity. If one were to object that the unification is due to the fact that
a child recalls the linguistic convention she acquired in previous lives, we reply
that this word at the time of the [acquisition] of the convention, after having abandoned the differentiation that derives from the word being thought as an object, as
‘this’, then it rests on the intellect shining. It is only when it exists as such that the
word becomes expressive. If the essential nature of the intellect is that on which
the word rests, then the intellect itself consists of ‘languageing’. Just as an object
is not intrinsically pleasant but the intellect shines as consisting of pleasure, in the
same way, we maintain that a form etc. is not intrinsically linguistic but that the
intellect will shine as ‘languageing’.
Still here, in this system, we also believe that the object itself is actually ‘languageing’, because it is of the nature of self-awareness. If conditions like stillness, etc. did not consist in reflexive awareness, then their existence would be
tantamount to a curse, because there would be no conceptual activity of the subject with regard to them and no memory of it as well; for if a conceptual activity were to arise directed at ascertaining the form [in stillness etc.], what else
can we say except that there is no ‘stillness’, because conceptualization binds

128

Appendix: translations

together all things? Therefore, even in the case of ‘stillness’, there is an internal
self-awareness. Objects support languageing by means of all words, but at the
moment of convention, one associates an object with a specific word. To explain:
a child has an innate reflexive awareness of an object in front of it either in terms
of identity, as the “I” or in terms of difference, as “this”. On top [of these two
cognitions] words such as ‘pale’ or ‘cow’ are imposed. Also, this word becomes,
through repeated usage, one with the knowing subject; then, on top of the words
“pale” and “cow”, the words “white” and “bull” are respectively imposed. This
is the essential nature of linguistic convention. Therefore, reflexive awareness is
present in the case of immediate cognitions. The word “also”, used above, has
this meaning: an immediate cognition truly finds its completion in an act of conceptualization like the one conveyed by the expression “I see”. For even others
think that conceptual knowledge is a function of perception. And it is not right to
distinguish a function from that which possesses that very function, for they have
the same nature. Even admitting that an immediate cognition has a momentary
nature, in that, too, there is reflexive awareness. This is necessary and is the reason why Utpaladeva says “how otherwise”? In fact, if it were not so [i.e. if there
were no reflexive awareness in the case of immediate cognitions], then a person
proceeding rapidly with a specific purpose, or reciting letters quickly, or reading
fast a book of mantras, would not reach, pronounce, or recite what she has in
mind. To explain: how can one reach the place she has in mind without a reflexive
awareness, whose essential aspect are unification and separation, and consists in
the knowledge of the place, the will to proceed, the actual proceeding, the awareness of the movement, the unification of another purpose, the desire to leave, the
knowledge of a different place, the desire to proceed towards it, and so forth?
The same applies to reading quickly, speaking, etc. Specifically, in these cases,
there is a union between places and organs of articulation etc. Since [here] one
does not experience a gross conceptual cognition, there is quickness. Therefore,
there must be a subtle reflexive awareness consisting in the verbal potentiality
in its contracted form, because a gross conceptual cognition is precisely a verbal
potentiality that has become visible by expansion, for example, the expansion of
“this” is “pot”, “white”, etc. The expansion of a pot is “having the form of a big
belly” or “permeated by the quality white which is connected with the universal
“whiteness”. The root dhāv may mean both ‘to clean’ and ‘to go’ but here means
‘to go quickly’ because of its own expressive power.4

Notes
1 na so’sti pratyayo loke yaḥ śabdānugamād ṛte / anuviddham iva jñānaṃ sarvaṃ śabdeṇa
bhāsate // (1.131).
		  [VPVṛ] yathāsya saṃhṛtarūpā śabdabhāvanā tathā jñeyeṣv artheṣūtpannenāpy avikalpena jñānena kāryaṃ na kriyate. tad yathā tvaritaṃ gacchatas tṛṇaloṣṭādisaṃsparśāt
saty api jñāne kācid eva sā jñānāvasthā, yasyām abhimukhībhūtaśabdabhāvanābījā
yām āvirbhūtāsv arthopagrāhiṇām ākhyeyarūpāṇām anākhyeyarūpāṇāṃ ca śabdānāṃ
pratyarthaniyatāsu śaktiṣu śabdānuviddhena śaktyanupātinā jñānenākriyamāṇa
upagṛhyamāṇo vastv ātmā jñānānugato vyaktarūpapratyavabhāso jñāyata ity abhidhīyate.

Appendix: translations 129
sa ca nimittāntarād āvirbhavātsu śrutibījeṣu smṛtihetur bhavati. tathaikeṣām ācāryāṇāṃ
suptasyāpi jāgradvṛttyā sadṛśo jñānavṛttiprabandhaḥ. kevalaṃ tu śabdabhāvanābījāni
tadā sūkṣmāṃ vṛttiṃ pratilabhante. tasmāt tāmasīṃ ceti tāmavasthām āhuḥ. tadetat
saṃjñānaṃ śabdaprakṛtivikārabhāvenāvirbhāvatirobhāvāv ajasraṃ pratyanubhavati.
		  vāgrūpatā ced utkrāmed avabodhasya śāśvatī / na prakāśaḥ prakāśeta sā hi
pratyavamarśinī // (VP 1.132).
		  [VPVṛ] yathā prakāśakatvam agneḥ svarūpaṃ caitanyaṃ vāntaryāmiṇaḥ, tathā
jñānam api sarvaṃ vāgrūpamātrānugatam. yāpy asañcetitāvasthā tasyām api sūkṣmo
vāgdharmānugamo ‘bhyāvartate. yo ‘pi prathamopanipātī bāhyeṣv artheṣu prakāśaḥ
sa nimittānām aparigraheṇa vastusvarūpamātram idaṃ tadityavyapadeśyayā vṛttyā
pratyavabhāsayati. smṛtikāle ‘pi tādṛśānām upalabdhibījānām ābhimukhye smartavyeṣu
ślokādiṣu prakāśānugamamātrarūpam iva buddhau viparivartate. ko ‘py asāv
anuvākaḥ śloko vā yo ‘yaṃ mayā śrutimātreṇa prakrānta iti. vāgrūpatāyāṃ cāsatyām
utpanno ‘pi prakāśaḥ pararūpam anaṅgīkurvan prakāśanakriyāsadhanarūpatāyāṃ
na vyavatiṣṭhate. bhinnarūpāṇāṃ cānupakāriṇām ātmāntarānatmanām itaretarasya
vastumātrājñāne pratyavabhāsamāne yad uttarakālam anusaṃdhānaṃ pratyavamarśa
ekārthakāritvavibhāgena śaktisaṃsargayogopagrahaḥ, tadā vāgrūpatāyāṃ baddham.
sā hy anusaṃdhānā pratyavamṛśantī ca sarvaviśeṣaṇaviśiṣṭe ‘pyarthakriyākāriṇi
pratyaye śaktyapoddhārakalpanayā bhedasaṃsargamātrāṃ na vijahāti.
		  sā sarvavidyāśilpānāṃ kalānāṃ copabandhanī / tadvaśād abhiniṣpannaṃ sarvaṃ
vastu vibhajyate (VP 1.133).
		  vidyāśilpakalādibhir laukikeṣu vaidikeṣu cārtheṣu manuṣyāṇāṃ prāyeṇa vyavahāraḥ
pratibaddhaḥ. manuṣyādhīnāś cetarasya bhūtagrāmasya sthāvarajaṅgamasya
pratṛtayaḥ. vidyādayaś ca vāgrūpāyāṃ buddhau nibaddhāḥ. ghaṭādīnāṃ cābhiniṣpādane
prayojyaprayojakānām upadeśasamīhādi sarvaṃ vāgrūpatānusāreṇa prakalpate.
		  saiṣā saṃsāriṇāṃ saṃjñā bahirantaśca vartate / tanmātrāmapyatikrāntaṃ caitanyaṃ
sarvajātiṣu // (VP 1.134).
		  yo ‘yaṃ caitanye vāgrūpatānugamas tena loke sasaṃjño visaṃjña iti vyapadeśaḥ
kriyate / evaṃ hy āha.
		  arthakriyāsu vāk sarvān samīhayati dehinaḥ / tadutkrāntau visaṃjño ‘yaṃ dṛśyate
kāṣṭhakuḍyavat // (VP 1.135).
		  antaḥsaṃjñānām api sukhaduḥkhasaṃvinmātrā yāvad vāgrūpatānuvṛttis tāvad eva
bhavati. bahiḥsaṃjñeṣu tannibandhano lokavyavahāras tadabhāvān niyatam utsīdet.
na hī sā cetanyenānāviṣṭā jātir asti, yasyāṃ svaparasambodho yo vācā nānugamyate.
tasmāc citikriyārūpam alabdhavākśaktiparigrahaṃ na
		  vidyate. vāktatvarūpam eva citikriyārūpam ity anye. tathāha:
		  bhedodgrāhavivartena labdhākāraparigrahā /
		  āmnātā sarvavidyāsu vāg eva prakṛtiḥ parā //
		  ekatvam anatikrāntā vāṅnetrā vāṅnibandhanāḥ /
		  pṛthak pratyavabhāsante vāgvibāgā gavādayaḥ //
		  ṣaḍdvārāṃ ṣaḍadhiṣṭhānāṃ ṣaṭprabodhāṃ ṣaḍavyayām /
		  te mṛtyum ativartante ye vai vācam upāsate //
2 jñeyastham eva sāmānyaṃ jñānānām upakārakam / na jātu jñeyavaj jñānaṃ pararūpeṇa
rūpyate // (VP 3.1.105).
		  [Helārāja] yathā jñeyaṃ vyatiriktasāmānyarūpeṇa rūpyate, rūpavat kriyate, naivaṃ
jñānaṃ saṃvidātmasamavetena vyatiriktasāmānyarūpeṇa rūpyate. jñeyadharmaḥ
kilāyaṃ yat pararūpeṇa rūpaṇam. jñānaṃ tu [a*]svatantraṃ jñeyam eva na bhavati.
jñeyaniṣṭhatayā hi jñānānāṃ jñeyasthasya sāmānyasyābhedena tadabhedāvasāyaḥ
pratyarthaniyatatve ‘py upapadyate. bāhyaparavaśatvenāsvādhīnatvāj jñānānāṃ svata
eva vailakṣaṇyānupapatteḥ bahir abhinnena nimittena tatra bhāvyam. tadyathā ghaṭo
ghaṭa iti ghaṭākāre bāhyaṃ nimittaṃ tathā bhede ‘pi tadgataṃ sāmānyam iti yuktam.
		  kathaṃ pūrvajñānaṃ jñeyaṃ na bhavatīti pararūpeṇa na rūpyata ity āhā:
		  yathā jyotiḥ prakāśena nānyenābhiprakāśyate / jñānākāras tathānyena na
jñānenopagṛhyate // (VP 3.1.106).

130

Appendix: translations

		  [Helārāja] yathā ghaṭādīnāṃ dīpaḥ prakāśakaḥ svaprakāśe dīpāntaraṃ nāpekṣate
tathārthasya prakāśakaṃ jñānam ātmaprakāśanāya prakāśāntarānapekṣam iti
svaprakāśakaṃ siddham. jaḍavailakṣaṇyaṃ hi prakāśakatvam iti tasyāpi prakāśyatve
jaḍatāpattiḥ. arthaprakāśakāle ca prakāśakasyāprakāśe ‘rthasaṃvedanam eva na syāt.
prakāśāsañcetane tallagnārthasañcetanāsiddheḥ. uttarakālaṃ tu vedanaṃ kvopayogi.
utpannāyāṃ ca prakaṭatāyāṃ ātmasamavetasya tadānīṃ jñānasyāsañcetanān mama
prakaṭito ‘rtha ity ātmagāmi saṃvedanaṃ na syāt. tasmāj [Iyer: tasyāj*] jñānāntareṇa
svaprakāśakaṃ jñānaṃ na gṛhyate paraprakāśyatve prakāśakatvābhāvād iti tadākārasya
pareṇa rūpeṇābhāvāj jñeyastham evābhinnaṃ sāmānyam asyābhedanimittam. tadvaśād
asya grāhyākārasya jñānāntareṇābhedagrahaṇāt. svasamavetasāmanyavaśena tv
abhedapratibhāse bahiḥ sāmānyaparikalpo nirnibandhana eva syāt. anyathaivābhed
apratibhāsasyopapatteḥ. arthānāṃ tu vyatiriktatvād abhinnaṃ sāmānyam upapadyate. jñānānāṃ tu sāmānyākāro na vyatirikta iti nābhinna upapadyate. pratyarthaniyatatvena teṣāṃ bhedāt tadabhinnasya tasyāpi tathātvopapatter iti nārthaiḥ sāmyam
asti. buddhyākārāṇām ākārasāmyād eva ca jñānānām abhedāvasāyasiddher na
saṃvedanabhāge ‘pi sāmānyayoga iti sākārāḥ svaprakāśāḥ niḥsāmānyā buddhayaḥ
siddhāḥ. yady api ca vaiśeṣīkā jñeyastham eva sāmānyaṃ jñānānām upakārakam
icchanto na sākāraṃ nāpi svaprakāśaṃ vijñānam icchanti, tathāpi na vayaṃ
darśanāntaraprakriyāṃ brūmaḥ. api tu yatpramāṇopapannam itīdam atra darśanam
upakṣiptam.
		  nanu ca yathā ghaṭo ‘yam iti jñāne ghato ‘vasīyate tathā ghaṭajñānam etad iti jñane
ghaṭajñānam. ko hy atra viśeṣa? yadi tu viṣayasaṃvedanarupā buddhir nānubhūyeta
śabdenāpi tathā nābhidhīyeta, anubhavapūrvakatvād abhidhānasya. na cātmanā
ātmānam anubhavati buddhiḥ, svātmani vyāpāravirodhāt. bodharūpatvāt tu svayam
ajñātaivārtham avabhāsayatu. etāvān asya bāhyād viśeṣo ‘stu. tadbubhutsāyāṃ tu
buddhyantaram evāpekṣyam. jñānajñeyasiddhimātraniṣṭhatvāc ca vyavahārasya
pratyayāntarānapekṣaṇād buddhimālāpi nānuṣajyata ityāha:
		  ghaṭajñānam iti jñānaṃ ghaṭajñānavilakṣaṇam / ghaṭa ity api yaj jñānaṃ
viṣayopanipāti tat // (VP 3.1.109).
		  [Helārāja] ghaṭajñānam iti jñānam ghaṭādyākāraṃ jñānaṃ yadā jñānāntareṇa
parāmṛśyate evaṃ mamātrānubhavo bhūta iti pratyayaviṣayaṃ yat parāmarśajñānaṃ
tad ghaṭajñānād bhinnalakṣaṇaṃ sākṣād viṣayeṇājanitatvāt. anukāryapratyayā
eva hi viṣayena janyante nānye jñānālambanāḥ, vyavadhānāt, sārūpyabālena
ca grāhyagrāhakabhāvaḥ [Iyer: *bhāvena]. vaidharmyena na ca ghaṭajñānaṃ
jñānāntare pratibhāsate. ato na tad gṛhyate. athocyate, sarūpam eva tajjñānam
ghaṭa ity evam anusaṃdhānād ity āha, ghāṭa ity api yaj jñānaṃ viṣayopanipāti tat.
na tu jñāne upanipatati. ato na buddhir buddhim ālambate, svayam eva tu prakāśata
ity arthaḥ. anye vyācakṣate, ghaṭajñānād bāhyaviṣayāt ghaṭajñānam iti evaṃ
jñānaṃ bhinnaṃ na viṣayāpraviṣṭaṃ [Iyer: viṣayapraviṣṭaṃ] svātmavyavasthitaṃ
jñānaṃ sañcetyate, yasmād ghaṭa ityevamākāraṃ yad vicchinnaṃ grāhyaprasṛtaṃ
tad api viṣayam anupatati grāhyaparavaśam. viṣayāprakāśena jñānastitāyā
evānibandhanatvāt. evaṃ ca bodhatvāviśeṣāt yady api jñānajñānam iti mataṃ tad
api bāhyaviṣayam evety uktaṃ bhavati. anye tu vyācakṣate ghaṭajñānam iti jñānam
viṣayo yasya tad ghaṭajñānavilakṣanam, anevaṃsvarūpam [Iyer: evaṃsvarūpam]
anākāram. na hi sāmvidākāras tajjñānābhimate pratibimbībhavati. sārūpyavaśena
grāhyagrāhakabhāvaḥ. anyathā jñānatvāviśeṣād idam asya saṃvedanam iti pratiniyamo na syāt. ghato iti tu yad etad bāhyaviṣayaṃ jñānaṃ tad viṣayopanipāti viṣayākāram
upādatte. atha vā ghaṭajñānam iti jñānam ghaṭajñānavilakṣanam. kiṃ tadvailakṣaṇyam
ity āha ghaṭa ity api yaj jñānam viṣayopanipāti tat. nirākāram api tad viṣayam anupatati paricchinatti nirūpayaty evaṃrūpo ‘yam artha iti. ghaṭajñānam iti tu jñānaṃ
na jñānarūpānupāti, yato ghaṭajñānagataṃ viṣayam nirūpya, jñānarūpaṃ kim api
tad ity etāvad yadi paraṃ nirūpayituṃ śaknoti, na tu sā tadīyā bodharūpatā tasya
pratibhāsate, parasaṃvedana iva. pareṇa hi ghaṭajñānam asyotpannam iti kayācid
yuktyā jñānaṃ paricchidyate, na tu svavatparasya pratibhāsate iti tato vilakṣaṇaṃ

Appendix: translations 131
na tasya paricchedakam. upalambhātmakatvāt svayaṃ prakāśata iti svasaṃvedanaṃ
jñānam ucyate. na tv ātmānam artham iva prakāśayatīti na svātmany asya kaścid
vyāpāraḥ.
		  nanu jñānasya grāhyākāro na vyatiriktaḥ, sa ca ghaṭajñānam iti jñānena saṃvedyata
iti buddhir eva saṃveditā bhavatīty āśaṅkyāha:
		  yato viṣayaṛupeṇa jñānarūpaṃ na gṛhyate / artharūpaviviktaṃ ca svarūpaṃ
nāvadhāryate // (VP 3.1.110).
		  [Helārāja] nirākāravāde ‘py ayaṃ parihāro lagati, yatas tatrāpi ghaṭajñānam etad
iti grāhyasvabhāvena jñānaṃ jñānāntaram upalakṣayati, na tadrahitam ātmatattvaṃ
tasyāvadhārayati. na ca grāhyākāro jñānasvarūpam, aupādhikatvāt. yathā
sphaṭikasya nīlādi. na ca grāhyākāraviviktaṃ grāhakarūpaṃ jñānāntareṇopalakṣyate
śuddhabuddhyanukāreṇa buddhyantarānupapatteḥ. evaṃ ca viṣayāprakāśane
jñānatvāyogāt jñānajñānābhimatam api viṣayaniṣṭham eva. tathā copasarjanena
viṣaya eva tena viśiṣṭo ‘vasthāpyate jñāto ‘yam artha iti. nīlajñānam ity etad api
nīlaniṣṭhatayā viṣayaprabhavaṃ jñānaṃ parāmṛśyate. evaṃ ca kṛtvā saṃvidākārasya
jñānāntareṇāgrahaṇān na vyatiriktasāmānyarūpeṇa nirūpaṇam. grāhyākārasya
tu jñānāntareṇābhedena grahaṇaṃ jñeyasthābhinnasāmānyanimittaṃ, tena tasya
grāhyākārasyāvilakṣaṇasya janane tathaiva buddhyantareṇa grahaṇād iti na tatra
sāmānyāntaram upayujyate. nāpītaretarāśrayadoṣaḥ. jñeyasāmānyasyābhinnajñānaj
anakatvenābhinnajñānasya ca jñeyatāpratipādakatvena vyāpārabhedāt. tenaitad acodyam. yathā vinaiva sāmānyam abhedāvasāyo buddhīnām evam arthānām api [na?]
bhaviṣyatīti buddhīnām api sāmānyavaśenaivoktaprakāreṇābhedāvasāyāt iti. nanu
yadi jñānarūpam artharūpaviviktaṃ nāvadhāryate svato ‘py asya siddhir na syāt?
satyam. sarvadaiva grāhyākāraḥ sahabhāvyanubhūyate ‘sya, kiṃ tu tatpṛṣṭhabhāvino
hlādanīyaprakrāmā ahaṃkārāspadavicchinnagrāhyākāravidharmāṇa uttararūpā
ahaṃkārāspadatayā saṃcetyanta iti svatas tadviviktarūpāvadhāraṇam asti buddhīnām.
jñānāntareṇa tu hlādādayo gṛhyamāṇā api tathā na saṃvedyanta iti anubhavasiddham
etad anapahnavanīyam ity alam ativistareṇa.
3 See A 3.3.169 arhe kṛtyatṛcaśca.
4 svabhāvam avabhāsasya vimarśāṃ vidur anyathā / prakāśo ‘arthoparakto ‘pi sphaṭi­
kādijaḍopamaḥ // (ĪPK 1.5.11).
		  [Abhinavagupta] iha avabhāsasya prakāśasya, anavabhāsasya ca aprakāśasya
ghaṭādeḥ parasparaparihāreṇa dvayoḥ svātmani cet vyavasthānam, tat ghaṭapaṭayoḥ iva
idam ajaḍam idaṃ jaḍam iti durupapādaṃ vailakṣyaṇam. atha avabhāso yato ‘rthasya
saṃbandhī, tato na jadaḥ, tarhi saṃbandhamātreṇa mṛt api ghaṭasya iti ajaḍā syāt.
atha na svasaṃbandhamātram api tu avabhāso ‘rthasya prakāśaḥ, tarhi arthātmanā
sa prakāśa iti samāpatitam. na ca anyātmanā anyasya prakāśa upapannaḥ. atha
anyasvabhāvo ‘pi ghaṭo ‘vabhāsasya kāraṇam, tarhi avabhāso ‘pi ghaṭasya kāraṇam
iti ghaṭo ‘pi ajaḍaḥ syāt. atha anyena satāpi ghaṭena yato ‘vabhāsasya pratibimbarūpā
cchāyā dattā, tām asau avabhāso bibhrat ghaṭasya iti ucyate, tataś ca ajaḍaḥ, tarhi
sphaṭikasalilamakurādiḥ api evaṃbhūta eva iti ajaḍa eva syāt. atha tathābhūtam
api ātmānaṃ taṃ ca ghaṭādikaṃ sphaṭikādiḥ na parāmraṣṭuṃ samartha iti jaḍaḥ,
tathāparāmarśanam eva ajāḍyajīvitam antarbahiṣkaraṇasvātantryarūpaṃ svābhāvikam
avabhāsasya svātmaviśrāntilakṣaṇam ananyamukhaprekṣitvaṃ nāma. aham evaṃ
prakāśātmā prakāśe iti hi vimarśodaye svasaṃvid eva pramātṛprameyapramāṇādi
kṛtārtham abhimanyate na tu atiriktaṃ kāṅkṣati, sphaṭikādi hi gṛhītapratibimbam
api tathābhāvena siddhau pramātrantaram apekṣate iti nirvimarśatvāt jaḍam. sarvatra vastuto vimarśātmaka—pramātṛ—svabhāva—tādātmyāhaṃparāmarśaviśrānteḥ
ajaḍatvam eva pūrvāparakoṭyoḥ. yad uktam: ‘idam ity asya vicchinnavimarśasya
kṛtārthatā / yā svasvarūpe viśrāntir vimarśaḥ so ‘ham ity ayam iti //’.
		  madhyāvasthaiva tu idantāvimṛśyamānapūrvāparakoṭiḥ vimūḍhānāṃ māyāpadaṃ
saṃsāraḥ iti vimarśa eva pradhānaṃ bhagavata iti sthitam.
		  na kevalaṃ saṃvit tatttvasya asmābhiḥ eva vimarśaprādhānyam uktaṃ yāvat
āgamāntarair api iti darśayati.

132

Appendix: translations

		  ātmāta eva caitanyaṃ citkriyācitikartṛtā / tātparyeṇoditastena jaḍāt sa hi vilakṣaṇaḥ
// (ĪPK 1.5.12).
		  [Abhinavagupta] yato vimarśa eva pradhānam ātmano rūpam amum eva hetuṃ
prayojanarūpam uddiśya ātmā dharmisvabhāvo dravyabhūto ‘pi, caitanyam iti
dharmavācinā śabdena sāmānādhikaraṇyam
		  āśritya uditaḥ kathitaḥ, bhagavatā śivasūtreṣu ‘caitanyam ātmā’ iti paṭhitam. caitanyam iti hi dharmavācakopalakṣaṇam, ‘citiśaktir apariṇāminī’ ‘ . . . ṭaddṛśeḥ kaivalyam’.
‘draṣṭā dṛśimātraḥ . . . ’ityādau api hi dharmaśabdena sāmānādhikaraṇyam ātmano
darśitaṃ guruṇā anantena. dravyaṃ hi tat ucyate yadviśrāntaḥ padārthavargaḥ sarvo
bhāti ca arthyate ca arthakriyāyai, tad yadi na kupyate tat sakalo ‘yaṃ
		  tattvabhūtabhāvabhuvanasaṃbhāraḥ saṃvidi viśrāntaḥ tathā bhavati iti sa eva guṇa
karmādidharmāśrayabhūtapadārthāntarasvabhāvaḥ tām eva
		  mukhyadravyasvarūpām āśrayate iti saiva dravyam. tat anantadharmarāśiviśr
amabhittibhūtāyāḥ tasyāḥ sa eva dharmaḥ caitanyam iti kartṛkṛdantāt utpannena
bhāvapratyayena
		  saṃbandhābhidhāyināpi prādhānyena darśitaḥ. tathā hi saṃbandhiviśrāntasya
pratīteḥ, dravyarūpasya ca saṃbandhinaḥ prakṛtyā uktatvāt citikriyārūpaṃ dharmaṃ
saṃbaddham avagamayatā ṣyañā niṣkṛṣṭāṃśaḥ pratyāyito bhavati. citikriyā ca citau
kartṛtā, svātantryaṃ saṃyojanaviyojanānusaṃdhānādirūpam
		  ātmamātratāyām eva jaḍavat aviśrāntatvam aparicchinnaprakāśasāratvam
ananyamukhaprekṣitvam iti. tad eva anātmarūpāt jaḍāt saṃyojanaviyojanādisvātantrya
vikalāt vailakṣaṇyādāyi iti. tad evaṃ paratvena pradhānatayā abhisaṃdhāya ātmā cetana iti vaktavye dharmāntarādharīkaraṇāya vimarśadharmoddhurīkaraṇāya ca ‘ātmā
caitanyam’ ity uktam. citkriyācitikartṛtātātparyeṇa iti samāsaḥ. ardhayuk pādaviśrāntiḥ
iti hi kāvye samayaḥ, na śāstre. yadi vā citkriyā ātmā uditaḥ citikartṛtā ca iti pṛthag eva.
evaṃ tu na kvacit paṭhitam.
		  nanu yathā prakāśo ‘prakāśaś ca iti ubhayam api svātmani, tataś ca prakāśa ity ukte
jaḍāt na vailakṣaṇyam uditaṃ syāt, tadvat vimarśo ‘pi avimarśo ‘pi ca svātmani, iti
tenāpi kathaṃ vailakṣaṇyaṃ jaḍājaḍayoḥ ityāśaṅkyāha.
		  citiḥ pratyavamarśātmā parā vāksvarasoditā / svātantryam etan mukhyaṃ
tadaiśvaryaṃ paramātmanaḥ // (ĪPK 1.5.13).
		  [Abhinavagupta] cetayati ity atra yā citiḥ citikriyā tasyāḥ pratyavamarśaḥ
svātmacamatkāralakṣaṇa ātmā svabhāvaḥ. tathā hi, ghaṭena svātmani na camatkriyate,
svātmā na parāmṛśyate, na svātmani tena prakāśyate, na aparicchinnatayā
		  bhāsyate, tato na cetyata iti ucyate. caitreṇa tu svātmani aham iti
saṃrambhodyogollāsavibhūtiyogāt camatkriyate, svātmā parāmṛśyate, svātmany eva
prakāśyate, idam iti yaḥ pariccheda etāvadrūpatayā
		  tadvilakṣaṇībhāvena nīlapītasukhaduḥkhatacchūnyatādyasaṃkhyāvabhāsayogena
avabhāsyate, tataḥ caitreṇa cetyate iti ucyate. evaṃ ca vimarśaḥ svātmani avimarśo ‘pi.
svātmani ity asiddham etat. vimarśo hi sarvaṃsahaḥ param api ātmīkaroti, ātmānaṃ ca
parīkaroti, ubhayam ekīkaroti, ekīkṛtaṃ dvayam api nyagbhāvayati ity evaṃ svabhāvaḥ.
pratyavamarśaś ca āntarābhilāpātmakaśabdanasvabhāvaḥ, tac ca śabdanaṃ
		  saṅketanirapekṣam eva avicchinnacamatkārātmakam antarmukhaśironirdeśapra­
khyam akārādimāyīyasāṅketikaśabdajīvitabhūta nīlam idaṃcaitro’ ham ityādipratyav
amarśāntarabhittibhūtatvāt, pūrṇatvāt parā, vakti viśvam abhilapati pratyavamarśena
iti ca vāk, ata eva sā svarasena cidrūpatayā svātmaviśrāntivapuṣā uditā sadānastamitā
nityā aham ity eva. etad eva paramātmano mukhyaṃ svātantryam aiśvaryam īśitṛtvam
ananyāpekṣitvam ucyate. parāparaṃ tu idaṃbhāvarūpasya
		  pratyavamarśasya akhyātiprāṇasya udbodhamātre ‘pi ahaṃbhāva eva viśrānteḥ
śrīsadāśivādibhūmau paśyantīdaśāyām. aparaṃ tu idaṃbhāvasyaiva nirūḍhau
māyāgarbhādhikṛtānām eva viṣṇuviriñcendrādīnām, tat tu teṣāṃ parameśvaraprasādajam
eva. iti anyanirapekṣataiva paramārthata ānandaḥ, aiśvaryam, svātantryam, caitanyam. tasmāt yuktam uktam ‘ . . . ṭena jaḍāt sa hi vilakṣaṇaḥ’ iti. pradhānāgameṣv api
etat pradarśitam eva iti nirūpayati:

Appendix: translations 133
		  sā sphurattā mahāsattā deśakālāviśeṣiṇī/saiṣā sāratayā proktā hṛdayaṃ
parameṣṭhinaḥ (ĪPK 1.5.14).
		  [Abhinavagupta] iha ghaṭaḥ kasmāt asti, khapuṣpaṃ kasmāt nāsti ity ukta iti vaktāro
bhavanti ghaṭo hi sphurati mama na tu itarat iti. tad etat ghaṭatvam eva yadi sphurattvaṃ
sphuraṇasaṃbandhaḥ, tat sarvadā sarvasya sphuret na kasyacidvā, tasmāt mama sphurati
iti ko’rthaḥ, madīyaṃ sphuraṇaṃ spandanam āviṣṭam iti. spandanañca kiñciccalanam,
eṣaiva ca kiñcidrūpatā yat acalam api calam ābhāsate iti, prakāśasvarūpaṃ hi manāg api
nātiricyate, atiricyate iva iti tat acalam eva ābhāsabhedayuktam iva ca bhāti. tata uktam:
		  ‘ātmaiva sarvabhāveṣu sphurannirvṛtacidvapuḥ / aniruddhecchāprasaraḥ prasa­
raddṛkkriyaḥ śivaḥ //
		  iti. tathā: atikruddhaḥ prahṛṣṭo vā kiṃ karomiti vā mṛśan / dhāvanvā
yatpadaṃ gacchet tatra spandaḥ pratiṣṭhitaḥ // iti ‘ . . . ṣpandatattvaviviktaye’iti.
guṇādispandaniḥṣyandāḥ . . .’. iti ca. loke ‘pi spandavattvam. sattā ca bhavanakartṛtā
sarvakriyāsu svātantryam. sā ca khapuṣpādikam api vyāpnoti iti mahatī, deśakālau
nīlādivat saiva sṛjati iti tābhyāṃ viśeṣaṇīyā na bhavati, yat kila yena tulyakakṣyatayā
bhāti tat tasya viśeṣaṇaṃ kaṭaka iva
		  caitrasya. na ca deśakālau vimarśena tulyakakṣyau bhātaḥ tayoḥ idantayā tasyaca ahantayā prakāśe tulyakakṣyatvānupapatteḥ. evaṃ deśakālāsparśāt vibhutvaṃ
nityatvaṃ ca, sakaladeśakālasparśo’pi tannirmāṇayogāt iti tato’pi vyāpakatvanityatve.
tad uktam: ‘mahāsattā mahādevī viśvajīvanamucyate’
		  iti. sāram iti yat atucchaṃ rūpaṃ tat iyameva vimarśaśaktiḥ, grāhyagrāhakāṇāṃ
yat prakāśātmakaṃ rūpaṃ tasyāpi aprakāśavailakṣaṇyākṣepikā iyam eva iti
śrīsāraśāstre ‘pi nirūpitam: ‘yat sāram asya jagataḥ sā śaktir mālinī parā’ iti. saiṣā
iti śaktipratyabhijñānaṃ darśitam. hṛdayaṃ ca nāma pratiṣṭhāsthānam ucyate, tac
ca uktanītyā jaḍānāṃ cetanam, tasyāpi prakāśātmakatvam, tasyāpi vimarśaśaktiḥ iti
viśvasya parame pade
		  tiṣṭhato viśrāntasya tasya idam eva hṛdayaṃ vimarśarūpaṃ paramantrātmakaṃ
yatra tatra abhidhīyate. sarvasya hi mantra eva hṛdayam, mantras ca vimarśanātmā,
vimarśanaṃ ca parāvākcchaktimayam. tata evoktam: ‘na tair vinā bhavec chabdo
nārtho nāpi citer gatiḥ’ iti. ‘tatra tāvatsamāpannā mātṛbhāvam. . .’ ityādi ca, ityāgameṣu.
tatrabhavad bhartṛhariṇāpi: ‘na so’sti pratyayo loke yaḥ śabdānugamād ṛte / anuviddham iva jñānaṃ sarvaṃ śabdena gamyate // vagrūpatā ced utkrāmed avabodhasya
śāśvatī / na prakāśaḥ prakāśeta sā hi pratyavamarśinī // iti. ‘saiṣā saṃsāriṇāṃ saṃjñā
bahir antaśca vartate / yad utkrāntau visaṃjño ‘yaṃ dṛśyate kāṣṭhakuḍyavat //’ ityādi
ca. tat etena viduḥ ity etat nirvāhitam. bauddhair api adhyavasāyāpekṣaṃ
		  prakāśasya prāmāṇyaṃ vadadbhiḥ upagataprāya eva ayam arthaḥ abhilāpātmakatvāt
adhyavasāyasya iti.
		  nanu asaṃkhyaśaktiśreṇīśobhitavapuṣi paramaśive vimarśaśaktireva
		  iyam itthaṃkāram abhiṣicyate kasmāt ityāśaṅky āha:
		  ātmānam ata evāyaṃ jñeyīkuryāt pṛthak sthiti / jñeyaṃ na tu tadaunmukhyāt
khaṇḍyetāsya svatantratā // (ĪPK 1.5.15).
		  svātantryāmuktamātmānaṃ
svātantryādadvayātmanaḥ
/
prabhurīśādisaṃkalpairnirmāya vyavahārayet // (ĪPK 1.15.16).
		  [Abhinavagupta] sarvāḥ śaktoḥ kartṛtvaśaktiḥ aiśvaryātmā samākṣipati. sā ca
vimarśarūpā iti yuktam asyā eva prādhānyam iti tātparyeṇa uttaramuktam. śabdārthas
tu ayam, prakāśātmā parameśvaraḥ svātmānaṃ jñātrekarūpatvāt ajñeyam api
jñeyīkaroti iti yat saṃbhāvyate kāraṇāntarasya anupapatteḥ darśitatvāt dṛḍhena
saṃbhāvanānumānena,
		  tadata eva vimarśaśaktilakṣaṇāt kartṛtvāt hetoḥ bhavati, yato hi ayam ātmānaṃ
parāmṛśati tato viśvanirbharatvāt tathā nīlāditvena cakāsti. nanu eṣaiva kutaḥ
saṃbhāvanā, ātmānaṃ jñeyīkaroti iti? āha, pṛthak prakāśāt bahirbhūtā sthitiḥ yasya
tādṛk jñeyaṃ naiva bhavati. tuḥ avadhāraṇe. tatra ca uktā yuktayaḥ. abhyuccayayuktim
api āha, yadi vyatiriktaṃ jñeyaṃ syāt tat jñātṛrūpasya ātmano yat etat jñeyaviṣayam
aunmukhyaṃ

134

Appendix: translations

		  svasaṃvedanasiddhaṃ dṛśyate tat na asya syāt, tena vyatiriktaviṣayaunmukhyena
		  anyādhīnatvaṃ nāma pāratantryam asya ānīyate. pāratantryaṃ ca svātantryasya
viruddham. svātantryameva ca ananyamukhaprekṣitvam ātmanaḥ svarūpam, iti vyatiriktonamukha ātmā anātmaiva syāt. anātmā ca
		  jaḍo jñeyaṃ prati na unmukhībhavati iti prasaṅgaḥ. tataḥ prasaṅgaviparyayāt
idamāyātam avyatiriktonmukhaḥ svatantraḥ san ātmānameva jñeyīkaroti iti.
		  na ca kevalaṃ nīlādirūpam eva jñeyam, yāvat atyaktakartṛsvabhāvaṃ svātantryeṇa
aparityaktam eva santam ātmānaṃ nirmāya vyavahāreṇa dhyānopāsanārcanopadeśādinā
yojayati iti yat saṃbhāvyate tad api ata eva iti saṃbandhaḥ. nanu svātantryayuktaṃ ca
nirmāyate ca iti viruddham idam? atrāha advayātmanaḥ saṃvidekarūpasya svātantryāt
hetoḥ idaṃ na na yujyate, yat kila māyāpade atidurghaṭaṃ pratibhāti, tatsaṃpādane
yat apratihataṃ svātantryaṃ tad eva punaḥ svātantryaśabdena darśitam. ata eva ity
anena tu
		  vimarśaśaktirūpam iti apunaruktam. atha vā ata eva svātantryāt iti sāmānādhi­
karaṇyena ślokadvayena saṃbandhanīyam. udāharaṇam atrārthe darśayati, nīlādi­
nirmāṇavat asya svatantranirmāṇasya aprasiddhatvāt, īśvaro bhagavān ātmā nityo
vibhuḥ svatantraḥ ityevamādau hi pramātuḥ, pūjayituḥ, dhyātuḥ vā’pṛthagbhūtaṃ tat
prameyam, pūjyam, dhyeyaṃ ca bhāti iti tat tāvat nirmitam, na ca anīśvaram evaṃ hi
īśvara iti, anīśvara iti saṃkalpadhyānādeḥ tulyatvaṃ syāt, na ca evam phalabhedasya
upalabdheḥ iti, tasmāt svātantryaśūnyatābhāsanena svātantryayuktatābhāsanena ca
yat idam ubhayaṃ jñeyaṃ ātmarūpam eva parameśvaro bhāsayati tat vimarśaśaktibalāt
eva, iti saiva pradhānam iti.
		  nanu prakāśabalāt bhāvavyavasthā, sa ca prakāśo vimarśasāra iti vimarśābhede
tad eva tat iti vaktuṃ yuktam īśvara ātmā ityādisaṃkalpeṣu ca nirmitasya idantayā
parāmarśaḥ, svātantryaṃ tu ahaṃparāmarśarūpam, iti
		  nirmitasya tadrūpatvābhāve kathaṃ svātantryāmuktatvam iti? tat etatparihartum āha:
		  nāhantādiparāmarśabhedādasyānyatātmanaḥ / ahaṃmṛśyatayaivāsya sṛṣṭestiṅvā­
cyakarmavat // (ĪPK 1.5.17).
		  [Abhinavagupta] svarūpe bhāvapratyayaḥ, ādigrahaṇāt ātmeśvarādiparāmarśaḥ,
tiṅgrahaṇaṃ kriyāvācipratyayopalakṣaṇam, karmagrahaṇam asattvabhūtaśaktirūpopa
lakṣaṇam. tat ayam arthaḥ, aham ityevaṃsvarūpo yaḥ
		  parāmarśo yaśca īśvaraḥ pramātā ātmā śiva ityādiḥ anantaprakāraḥ parā­
marśaḥ, tasya yady api bhedo ‘nyonyarūpatā, tathāpi tadbhedāt hetoḥ asya
ātmano nirmātṛrūpasya ahaṃparāmarśamayasya nirmeyarūpasya ca īśvarādiparāma­
rśāspadasya yo bhedaḥ śaṅkitaḥ sa na yuktaḥ. yata īśvara ityapi yaḥ parāmarśaḥ,
sa īśanaśīle jñātṛtvakartṛtvatattve viśrāmyati, jñātṛtvādi ca jñānādau svātantryam
ananyamukhaprekṣitvam avicchinnajñānayogaḥ, avicchedaś ca jānāmi karomi iti
asmad arthaviśrāntiḥ iti asya īśvarasya
		  ātmanaḥ sṛṣṭeḥ sṛjyamānasya ahaṃvimarśanīyatvameva. sṛṣṭer iti vā hetau
pañcamī. asya īśvarasya yataḥ īśvarādisaṃkalpeṣu api ahaṃparāmarśanayogyasyaiva
sṛṣṭiḥ. arhe kṛtyaḥ yathākriyākārakasamuccayavikalpādiśaktayo yathāsvaṃ
tiṅtṛtīyādicavādi—prayogāvaseyaparāmarśaparamārthāḥ pākaḥ kartā samuccayo
vikalpaḥ ityādiśabdaiḥ abhidhīyamānāḥ sattvabhāvamāpāditā api pacati caitreṇa ca vā
ity evaṃrūpe mūlaparāmarśe viśrāmyanti, anyathā tu tāḥ pratītā naiva bhaveyuḥ. tadvat atrāpi. etad uktaṃ bhavati. parāmarśo nāma viśrāntisthānam, tac ca pāryantikam
eva pāramārthikam, tac ca ahamity evaṃrūpameva. madhyaviśrāntipadaṃ tu yat
vṛkṣamūlasthānīyaṃ grāmagamane tasya tadapekṣayā sṛṣṭatvam ucyate iti ko
virodhaḥ. anena nīlādeḥ api idaṃ nīlam iti madhyaparāmarśe ‘pi mūlaparāmarśe
aham ityeva viśrānteḥ ātmamayatvam upapāditameva. ‘nīlam idam vedmi’ ityapi hi
ahaṃ prakāśe itīyattattvam. yathoktam idam ityasya ityādi. mūḍhas tu nīlādivimarśāt
eva arthakriyādiparitoṣābhimānī iti nīlādeḥ svātantryanirmuktatvam uktam. ātmādau
tu tanmūlaparāmarśaviśrāntim antareṇa pratītiparisamāptim arthakriyāṃ ca mūḍho
‘pi na abhimanyata iti tasya nirmitau api anujjhitasvātantryam uktam.

Appendix: translations 135
		  nanv evaṃ viśvaparāmarśānām aham ityeva viśuddhaikaparāmarśaviśrāntir
eva tattvam tat katham idam ucyate jñānasmṛtyādikā asya śaktaya iti, jñānasya ca
saṃśayanirṇayādibhedaḥ nīlādīnāṃ ca vaicitryam? iti
		  āśaṅkāyāṃ parihāramāha māyāśaktyā vibhoḥ saiva bhinnasaṃvedyagocarā/kathitā
jñānasaṃkalpādhyavasāyādināmabhiḥ // (ĪPK 1.5.18).
		  [Abhinavagupta] anupapannam avabhāsanaṃ māyā iti ucyate, tataśca bhinnaṃ
prakāśāt sarvam avabhāsajātaṃ māyā, tatra ca cittattvasyaiva svātantryaṃ
māyāśaktiḥ, tayā bhinnaṃ yat saṃvedyaṃ pramātuśca anyonyataśca, māyāśaktyā
bhinnena pramātuḥ anyonyato vedyāc ca karaṇavargeṇa yat saṃvedyaṃ sa eva gocaro
viśrāntipadaṃ yasyāḥ tādṛśī satī, saiva pratyavamarśātmā citiḥ parāvāgrūpā jñānam
iti, saṃkalpa iti, adhyavasāya iti ca ucyate, ādigrahaṇāt saṃśayaḥ smṛtiḥ ityādi. tathā
hi yat indriyeṇa sphuṭagrāhiṇā bāhyena viṣayeṇa sphuṭena ca
		  niyantritaṃ saṃvittattvaṃ tat jñānam. manasā viṣayeṇa ca asphuṭena saṃkalpaḥ.
buddhyā viṣayeṇa ca viṣayatvaparyantabhājā adhyavasāyo niścayaḥ. viṣayasya ca yat
bhinnatvaṃ bahirantaḥ karaṇānāṃ ca
		  tatprakāśābhedāt anupapannaṃ cittattvena bhāsyate iti bhede yato viśrāntiḥ, na tu
bhedasya abhede īśvarasadāśivādivat, tato jñānasaṃkalpādayo bhinnāḥ tasya apradhv
astasvasvabhāvābhedasya
		  saṃvittattvasya anusaṃdhātuḥ śaktaya iti uktāḥ, saṃśayādayaśca bhinnā nīlādi­
vaicitryaṃ ca iti sarvam akhaṇḍitam.
		  nanu pratyavamarśātmatvaṃ citiśakteḥ saṅkalpasmaraṇādiśaktiṣu savikalpātmikāsu
bhavati. yā tu nirvikalparūpā sākṣātkaraṇalakṣaṇānubhavaśaktiḥ, tatra katham. pratya­
vamarśo hi abhilāpaviśeṣayojanāmayaḥ, abhilāpaviśeṣayojanā ca saṅketasmaraṇam
apekṣate. tac ca saṃskāraprabodham. so ‘pi tādṛśadṛśam, iti evaṃ prathamasamaye
katham abhilāpayogaḥ iti parasyavyāmoham apohitum āha:
		  sākṣātkārakṣaṇe’pyasti vimarśaḥ katham anyathā / dhāvanādy upapadyeta prati­
saṃdhānavarjitam // (ĪPK 1.5.19).
		  [Abhinavagupta] iha tāvat caitanyasya ātmabhūto ‘ṅgulinirdeśādiprakhyo
‘bhilāpayogaḥ, anyathā bālasya prathamaṃ vyavahāre dṛśyamāne vyutpattir eva na
syāt. nirvikalpakajñānaparaṃparayā hi taṃ śabdaṃ śṛṇoti, tataḥ tam arthaṃ puraḥ
paśyati, punastadviviktaṃ bhūtalaṃ paśyati iti ghaṭam ānaya naya iti vyavahārāt
katham asya ayam artha
		  iti hṛdi parisphuret, idam ghaṭa iti, idam ānaya iti, idaṃ naya iti, itiyojanāprāṇo hi
ayamarthaḥ, yojanā ca vikalpavyāpāraḥ. atha bālasya prāgjanmānubhūtasaṅketasmṛteḥ
evam, tathāpi saṅketakāle sa śabdo viṣayatvena idaṃbhāvena pratyavamṛśyamānatvāt
bhedāt pracyutya nirbhāsamāno vijñānaśarīre viśrāntaḥ san vācaka iti bhavati,
tad vijñānasya svarūpaṃ cet bhāti tat abhilāpamayam eva iti, yathā viṣayasya
sukharūpatvābhāve’pi jñānaṃ sukhātmakaṃ tathā mā bhūta abhilāpātmā rūpādiḥ
viṣayaḥ, tathāpi vijñānaṃ tadātmakaṃ avabhāsiṣyate. atra tu darśane viṣayasyāpi
vimarśamayatvāt abhilāpamayatvam eva vastutaḥ, staimityādyavasthāpi yadi na
parāmarśamayī tarhi asyāṃ vikalpātmakapramātṛvyāpārānullāsāt saṃbhavaḥ
śapathaparamārtha eva, smaraṇaṃ ca na syāt, rūpaviṣayādhyavasāyī hi yadi vikalpa
udiyāt kim anyat, sarvacintāsaṃharaṇena staimityaṃ nāma na syāt, iti tatrāpi asti
antaḥ parāmarśaḥ, sakalena ca śabdagrāmeṇa śabdanaṃ hi sahante vastūni, tatra ca
		  niyataśabdayojanaṃ kriyate. tathā hi bālasya puraḥ piṇḍe sahajo yaḥ parāmarśaḥ,
aham ity avicchedena idam iti vicchedena vā tatpṛṣṭhe eva gaura iti gauḥ iti vā
śabda āropyate, so’pi abhyāsāt pramātṛmayo bhavati, tatpṛṣṭhe ca anyaḥ śukla iti,
anyat balīvarda iti, ity evaṃ saṅketatattvam. tasmāt asti sākṣātkāre pratyavamarśaḥ.
apiśabdasya ayamāśayaḥ. iha sākṣātkāro vastutaḥ paśyāmi ityevaṃbhūtavikalpanavyā
pāraparyanta eva. vikalpo hi pratyakṣasya vyāpāra iti paro’pi manyate. na ca vyāpāraḥ
tadvato bhinno yuktaḥ, tatsvarūpabhūto hi
		  saḥ. bhavatu vā kṣaṇamātrasvabhāvaḥ sākṣātkāraḥ, tatrāpi asti vimarśaḥ. avaśyaṃ
caitat. katham anyathā iti. yadi sa na syāt tat ekābhisaṃdhānena javāt gacchan,

136

Appendix: translations

tvaritaṃ ca varṇān paṭhan, drutaṃ ca mantrapustakaṃ vācayan, na abhimatameva gacchet, uccārayet, vācayet vā. tathā hi tasmin deśe jñānam—ācikramiṣā—ākramaṇam—
ākrāntatājñānam—prayojanāntarānusaṃdhānam—tityakṣā—deśāntarānusaṃdhiḥ,
tatrāpi ācikramiṣā ityādināṃ yojanaviyojanarūpeṇa pratyavamarśena. vinābhimata­
deśāvāptiḥ kathaṃ bhavet. evaṃ
		  tvaritodgrahaṇavācanādau mantavyam. tatra viśeṣataḥ sthānakaraṇākramaṇā­
diyogaḥ. atra ca yataḥ paścādbhāvisthūlavikalpakalpanā na saṃvedyate, tata eva
tvaritatvam iti sūkṣmeṇa pratyavamarśena saṃvartitaśabdabhāvanāmayena bhāvyam
eva. saṃvartitā hi śabdabhāvanā prasāraṇena vivartyamānā sthūlo vikalpaḥ,
yathā idam ityasya prasāraṇā ghaṭaḥ śukla ityādiḥ, tasyāpi pṛthubudhnodarākāraḥ
śuklatvajātiyuktaguṇasamavāyī ity ādiḥ. dhāvu gatiśuddhau iti pāṭhāt dhāvistvaritagatau
svaśaktivaśāt vartata iti.

Bibliography

Primary sources
Abhinavabharati of Abhinavagupta: edited by M.R. Kavi. Nāṭyaśāstra with the Abhinavabharati of Abhinavagupta, Baroda. 1926–1964.
Bhāskarī of Bhāskarakaṇṭha. Bhāskarī. A Commentary on the Īśvarapratyabhijñāvimarśinī
of Abhinavagupta: edited by K.A.S. Iyer and K.C. Pandey. Vols. 1–2. The Prince of
Wales Sarasvati Bhavana Texts 70, 83. Allahabad. 1938–1950.
Brahmasūtrabhāṣya of Śaṅkara: edited by Anantakriṣṇa Śāstrī. Brahmasūtra bhāṣya.
Bombay: Nirṇaya Sāgar Press. 1938.
Hetubindu of Dharmakīrti: Critically edited by Ernst Steinkellner on the basis of preparatory work by Helmut Krasser with a translation of the Gilgit fragment by Klaus Wille.
Wien: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften. 2016.
Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikā (ĪPK) of Utpaladeva: edited by R. Torella. The
Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikā of Utpaladeva with the Author’s Vṛtti: Critical Edition and
Annotated Translation. Second edition. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Īśvarapratyabhijñāvimarśinī of Abhinavagupta: edited by K.A.S. Iyer and K.C. Pandey.
New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 1986.
Īśvarapratyabhijñāvivṛtivimarśinī of Abhinavagupta: edited by Madhusudan Kaul Shastri.
Vols. I–III. Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies 40, 42, 45. Bombay. 1938–1943.
Mahābhāṣyapradīpikā of Bhartṛhari: edited and translated by Johannes Bronkhorst. Fasc.
IV: Āhnika I. Postgraduate and Research Department Series 28. Pune: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. 1987.
Mālinīvijayottaratantra: edited by Madhusūdana Kaula Śāstrī. Mālinīvijayottaratantram.
Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies 37. Pune: Aryabhushan Press. 1922.
Nyāyabhāṣya of Vātsyāyana, Uddyotakara’s Vārttika, Vācaspati Miśra’s Tātparyaṭīkā and
Viśvanātha’s Vṛtti: edited by T. Nyaya-Tarkatirtha and A. Tarkatirtha. New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal. 2003.
Paramārthasāra of Abhinavagupta, with the Commentary of Yogarāja: edited by Kashmir
Series of Texts and Studies 7. Pune: Aryabhushan Press.
Parātriṃśikālaghuvṛtti of Abhinavagupta: edited by Jagaddhara Zādoo Shāstri. The
Parātriṃśikā Laghuvṛtti by Abhinavagupta. Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies 68.
Pune: Aryabhushan Press. 1947.
Parātriṃśikāvivaraṇa of Abhinavagupta: edited and translated by Raniero Gnoli. Il commento di Abhinavagupta alla Parātriṃśikā, traduzione e testo. Serie Orientale Roma 54.
Roma: IsMEO. 1985.

138

Bibliography

Parātriṃśikāvivaraṇa of Abhinavagupta: edited and translated by Jayadev Singh.
Parātriṃśikāvivaraṇa: The Secret of Tantric Mysticism. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 1988.
Pramāṇavārttika of Dharmakīrti: edited by Raniero Gnoli. Pramāṇavārttikam: First
Chapter with the Autocommentary, Text and Critical Notes. Serie Orientale Roma 23.
Rome: IsMEO. 1960.
Pramāṇavārttika of Dharmakīrti: edited by Swami Dwarikadas Shastri. Pramāṇavārttika
with the Commentary ‘Vṛtti’ of Acharya Manorathanandin. Varanasi. 1968.
Pramāṇaviniścaya of Dharmakīrti: Pramāṇaviniścaya, Chapters 1 and 2: edited by Ernst
Steinkellner. Beijing and Vienna: China Tibetology Publishing House. 2007.
Rājataraṅgiṇī of Kalhaṇa: edited by M.A. Stein. Kalhaṇa’s Rājataraṅgiṇī. Chronicle of
the Kings of Kashmir. Vol. III. Sanskrit Text with Critical Notes. New Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass. [1892] 1989.
Siddhitrayī of Utpaladeva: edited by Madhusudan Kaul Shastri. The Siddhitrayi and the
Pratyabhijna-karika-vritti of Rajanaka Utpala Deva. Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies 34. Pune: Aryabhushan Press. 1921.
Śivadṛṣṭi of Somānanda: edited by Madhusudan Kaul Shastri. The Śivadṛṣṭi of
Somānandanātha with the Vṛtti by Utpaladeva. KSTS 54. Pune: Aryabhushan Press. 1934.
Śivastotrāvalī of Utpaladeva with the Commentary (-vivṛti) of Kṣemarāja: edited by
Rājānaka Lakṣmaṇa [Lakshman Raina, Swami Lakshman Joo]. The Śivastotrāvalī of
Utpaladevācārya with the Sanskrit Commentary of Kṣemarāja edited with Hindi Commentary. Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series 15. Varanasi: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series
Office. 1964.
Śivasūtravārttika (ŚSūVā) of Bhāskara: edited by Jagadisha Chandra Chatterji. Shiva Sūtra
Vārttika by Bhāskara. Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies 4. Pune: Aryabhushan Press.
1916.
Śivasūtravārttika of Varadarāja: edited by Madhusudan Kaul Shastri. The Shivasutra—
Vartikam by Varadarāja. Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies 43. Pune: Aryabhushan
Press. 1925.
Śivasūtravimarśinī of Kṣemarāja: The Shiva Sūtra Vimarshinī, Being the Sūtras of Vasu
Gupta with the Commentary called Vimarshinī by Kshemarāja. Kashmir Series of Texts
and Studies 1. Pune: Aryabhushan Press. 1911.
Ślokavārttika of Kumārila: Ślokavārttika with the Commentary Nyāyaratnākara of Śrī
Pārthasārathi Miśra: edited and revised by Swami Dwarikadas Shastri, Prācyabhārati
Series 10. Varanasi. 1978.
Spandakārikā: edited by Jagadish Chandra Chatterji. The Spanda Kārikās with the Vṛtti by
Kallaṭa. Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies 5. Pune: Aryabhushan Press. 1916.
Spandakārikāvivṛti of Rājānaka Rāmakaṇṭha: The Spanda Kārikās with the Vivṛti of
Rāmakaṇṭha. Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies 6. Pune: Aryabhushan Press. 1913.
Sphoṭasiddhi of Maṇḍanamiśra: Sphoṭa Siddha (La démonstration du sphoṭa) par Maṇḍana
Miśra. Introduction, traduction et commentaire par Madeleine Biardeau. Texte sanskrit
établi par N. R. Bhatt avec la collaboration de T. Ramanujam. Publications de l’Institut
Français d’Indologie 13. Pondicherry: Institut Français d’Indologie. 1958.
Tantrāloka of Abhinavagupta: edited by Mukund Rām Shāstrī (v. 1) and Madhusūdan Kaul
Shāstrī (v. 2–12). The Tantrāloka of Abhinava-Gupta, with Commentary by Rājānaka
Jayaratha. Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies 23, 28, 30, 36, 35, 29, 41, 47, 59, 52,
57, 58. Allahabad and Bombay: Research Department of Jammu and Kashmir State.
1918–1938.

Bibliography 139
Tattvasaṃgraha of Śāntarakṣita with the Commentary Pañjikā of Śrī Kamalaśīla: critically
edited by Swami Dwarikadas Shastri. Varanasi. 1968.
Vākyapadīya of Bhartṛhari: edited by K.A. Subramania Iyer. Vākyapadīya, Containing the
Ṭīkā of Puṇyarāja and the Ancient Vṛtti. Kāṇḍa II. New Delhi. 1983.
Vākyapadīya of Bhartṛhari: edited by K.A. Subramania Iyer. Vākyapadīya of Bhartṛhari
with the Commentaries Vṛtti and Paddhati of Vṛṣabhadeva. Kāṇḍa I. Deccan College
Monograph Series 32. Pune: Deccan College. 1966.
Vākyapadīya of Bhartṛhari: edited by K.A. Subramania Iyer. Vākyapadīya with the Commentary of Helarāja. Kāṇḍa III, Part I. Pune: Deccan College. 1963.
Vākyapadīya of Bhartṛhari: edited by K.A. Subramania Iyer. Vākyapadīya with the
Prakīrṇaprakāśa of Helarāja. Kāṇḍa III, Part II. Pune: Deccan College. 1973.
Vākyapadīya of Bhartṛhari: edited by Wilhelm Rau. Bhartṛharis Vākyapadīya. Die
Mūlakārikās nach den Handschriften herausgegeben und mit einem Pāda-index versehen. Abhandlungen dür die Kunde des Moregenlandes 42, Part 4. Wiesbaden: Komissionsverlag Frans Steiner. 1977.
Vijñānabhairava: edited by Mukunda Rāma Śāstrī. The Vijñānabhairava with Commentaries by Kṣemarāja and Śivopādhyāya. Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies VIII. Pune:
Aryabhushan Press. 1918.
Vyākaraṇamahābhāṣya of Patañjali: edited by F. Kielhorn. Third edition, revised and furnished with additional readings, references and select critical notes by K.V. Abhyankar.
Pune. 1962–1972.

Secondary literature
Akamatsu, A. (1993). Pratibhā and the meaning of the sentence in Bhartṛhari’s Vākyapadīya.
Asiatische Studien/Études Asiatiques. 47, 37–43.
Akamatsu, A. (1999). The two kinds of anumāna in Bhartṛhari’s Vākyapadīya. Journal of
Indian Philosophy. 27 (1), 17–22.
Aklujkar, A. (1969). Two textual studies of Bhartṛhari. Journal of American Oriental Society. 89, 547–563.
Aklujkar, A. (1970). The philosophy of Bhartṛhari’s Trikāṇḍī. Doctoral dissertation, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA [Unpublished].
Aklujkar, A. (1972). The authorship of the Vākyapadīya-vṛtti. Wiener Zeitschrift für die
Kunde Südasiens. 16, 181–198.
Aklujkar, A. (1974). The authorship of the Vākya-kāṇḍa-ṭīkā. In: S.K. Chatterji, ed. Charu
Deva Shastri Felicitation Volume. New Delhi: Charu Deva Shastri Felicitation Volume
Committee. pp. 165–188.
Aklujkar, A. (1989a). The number of pramāṇas according to Bhartṛhari. Wiener Zeitschrift
für die Kunde Südasiens. 33, 151–158.
Aklujkar, A. (1989b). Prāmāṇya in the philosophy of the grammarians. In: A. Kumar et al.,
eds. Studies in Indology: Professor Rasik Vihari Joshi Felicitation Volume. New Delhi:
Shree Publishing House. pp. 15–28.
Aklujkar, A. (1990). Trikāṇḍī or Vākyapadīya, with Vṛtti on books 1 and 2. In: H. Coward
and K. Raj, eds. Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies: The Philosophy of the Grammarians. Vol. 5. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. pp. 121–174.
Aklujkar, A. (1991). Bhartṛhari’s concept of the Veda. In: M.M. Deshpande, ed. Pāṇini and
the Veda. Vol. V. Panels of the VIIth World Sanskrit Conference. Leiden: Brill. pp. 1–18.

140

Bibliography

Aklujkar, A. (1993a). An introduction to the study of Bhartṛhari. Asiatiche studien/Études
Asiatique. 47 (1), 7–36.
Aklujkar, A. (1993b). Once again on the authorship of the Trikāṇḍī-vṛtti. Asiatiche studien/
Études Asiatique. 47 (1), 45–57.
Aklujkar, A. (2000). The epistemological point of view of Bhartṛhari. In: Swami Prabhananda and J.L. Shaw, eds. Concepts of Knowledge: East and West. Papers from a
Seminar Held from 4 January to 10 January 1995, at the Ramakrishna Mission Institute
of Culture. Calcutta: Ramakrishna Mission Institute of Culture. pp. 1–19.
Aklujkar, A. (2001). The word is the world: Nondualism in Indian philosophy of language.
Philosophy East and West. 51 (4), 452–473.
Aklujkar, A. (2002). Il punto di vista epistemologico di Bhartṛhari. In: F. Squarcini, ed.
Verso l’India, oltre l’India. Milano: Mimesis. pp. 207–218.
Aklujkar, A. (2009). Veda revelation according to Bhartṛhari. In: M. Chaturvedi, ed. Bhartrhari: Language, Thought and Reality: Proceedings of the International Seminar. New
Delhi: Motilal Banardissas.
Alper, H. (1971). Abhinavagupta’s Concept of Cognitive Power: A Translation of the
Jñānaśaktyāhnika of the Īśvarapratyabhijñāvimarśinī with Commentary and Introduction. Doctoral dissertation, University of Pennsylvania.
Alper, H. (1979). Śiva and the ubiquity of consciousness: The spaciousness of an artful
yogi. Journal of Indian Philosophy. 7, 354–407.
Alper, H. (1989). Understanding Mantras. State University of New York Series in Religious
Studies. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Armstrong, D.M. (1968). A Materialist Theory of the Mind. New York: Humanities Press.
Arnold, D. (2001). Intrinsic validity reconsidered: A sympathetic study of the Mīmāṃsaka
inversion of Buddhist epistemology. Journal of Indian Philosophy. 29, 589–675.
Arnold, D. (2005). Buddhists, Brahmins, and Belief: Epistemology in South Asian Philosophy of Religion. New York: Columbia University Press.
Bansat-Boudon, L. (2011). An Introduction to Tantric Philosophy: The Paramārthasāra of
Abhinavagupta with the Commentary of Yogarāja. London: Routledge.
Bermúdez, J.L. (2003). Thinking Without Words. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bhate, S. (1993). Bhartṛhari on language and reality. Asiatiche studien/Études Asiatique.
47 (1), 67–73.
Bhate, S. and Bronkhorst, J., eds. (1994). Bhartṛhari, Philosopher and Grammarian:
Proceedings of the First International Conference on Bhartṛhari (University of Poona,
January 6–8, 1992). New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Bhate, S. and Kar Y. (1992). Word Index to the Vākyapadīya of Bhartṛhari. New Delhi:
Eastern Book Linkers.
Bhatt, G.P. (1962). The Basic Ways of Knowing: An In-Depth Study of Kumārila’s Contribution to Indian Epistemology. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Bhikku Bodhi (2003). Connected Discourses of the Buddha: A Translation of the Saṃyutta
Nikāya. Boston: Wisdom Publications.
Biardeau, M. (1964a). Bhartṛhari Vākyapadīya Brahmakāṇḍa: Avec la Vṛtti de
Harivṛṣabha. Paris: De Boccard.
Biardeau, M. (1964b). Théorie de la connaissance et philosophie de la parole dans le brahmanisme classique. Paris and La Haye: Mouton & Co.
Blackmore, S. (2004). Consciousness: An Introduction. New York: Oxford University Press.
Blumenthal, J. (2004). The Ornament of the Middle Way: A Study of the Madhyamaka
Thought of Śāntarakṣita. Boston and London: Snow Lion.

Bibliography 141
Böthlingk, O. and Roth, R. (1855). Sanskrit Wörterbuch. Saint Petersburg: Kaiserlichen
Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Bronkhorst, J. (1983). On the history of Pāṇinian grammar in the early centuries following
Patañjali. Journal of Indian Philosophy. 11, 357–412.
Bronkhorst, J. (1988). Études sur Bhartṛhari, 1: L’auteur et la date de la Vṛtti. Bulletin
d’Études Indiennes (Paris). 6, 105–143.
Bronkhorst, J. (1989). Studies on Bhartṛhari, 2: Bhartṛhari and Mīmāṃsā. Studien zur
Indologie und Iranistik. 15, 101–117.
Bronkhorst, J. (1991). Studies on Bhartṛhari 3: Bhartṛhari on sphoṭa and universals. Asiatiche studien/Études Asiatique. 45, 5–18.
Bronkhorst, J. (1992). Études sur Bhartṛhari, 4: L’absolu dans le Vākyapadīya et son lien
avec le Madhyamaka. Asiatische Studien/Études Asiatiques. 46 (1), 56–80.
Bronkhorst, J. (1993). Studies on Bhartṛhari 5: Bhartṛhari and Vaiśeṣika. Asiatische Studien/Études Asiatique. 47, 75–94.
Bronkhorst, J. (1996a). The self as agent: A review article. Asiatische Studien/Études Asiatiques. 50 (3), 603–621.
Bronkhorst, J. (1996b). Studies on Bhartṛhari 7: Grammar as the door to liberation. Annals
of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. 76, 97–106.
Bronkhorst, J. (1999). Studies on Bhartṛhari 8: Prākṛta dhvani and the Sāṃkhya tanmātras.
Journal of Indian Philosophy. 27 (1–2), 23–33.
Bronkhorst, J. (2001). The peacock’s egg: Bhartṛhari on language and reality. Philosophy
East and West. 51 (4), 474–491.
Bronkhorst, J. (2012). Studies on Bhartṛhari, 9: Vākyapadīya 2.119 and the early history of
Mīmāṃsā. Journal of Indian Philosophy. 40, 411–425.
Brooks, D. (1990). The Secret of the Three Cities: An Introduction to Hindu Śākta Tantrism.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Brough, J. (1973). I-ching on the Sanskrit grammarians. Bulletin of the School of Oriental
and African Studies. 36, 248–260.
Brüntrup, G. and Jaskolla, L., eds. (2017). Panpsychism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cardona, G. (1976). Pāṇini: A Survey of Research. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Cardona, G. (1997). Pāṇini: His Work and Its Traditions. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Cardona, G. (1999). Approaching the Vākyapadīya. Journal of the American Oriental Society. 119 (1), 88–125.
Carruthers, P. (1996). Language, Thought, and Consciousness. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Carruthers, P. (2000). Phenomenal Consciousness: A Naturalistic Theory. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Carruthers, P. (2016). Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness. In: E.N. Zalta, ed. The
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Fall 2016 edition. https://plato.stanford.edu/
archives/fall2016/entries/consciousness-higher/
Chakrabarti, A. (2012). Arguing from synthesis to self: Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta
respond to Buddhist no-self. In: I. Kuznetsova, J. Ganeri, and Chakravarthi RamPrasad, eds. Hindu and Buddhist Ideas in Dialogue: Self and No-Self. London: Ashgate.
pp. 199–216.
Chakrabarti, A. and Weber, R. (2015). Comparative Philosophy Without Borders. London:
Bloomsbury.
Chakrabarti, K.K. (1999). Classical Indian Philosophy of Mind. Albany: State University
of New York Press.

142

Bibliography

Chalmers, D. (1996). The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Chalmers, D. (2015). Panpsychism and panprotopsychism. In: T. Alter and Y. Nagasawa,
eds. Consciousness in the Physical World: Perspectives on Russellian Monism. Oxford:
Oxford University Press. pp. 246–276.
Chatterjee, T. (1979). Did Prabhākara hold the view that knowledge is self-manifesting?
Journal of Indian Philosophy. 7, 267–276.
Coleman, S. (2014). The real combination problem: Panpsychism, micro-subjects and
emergence. Erkentniss. 79, 19–44.
Coleman, S. (2017). Panpsychism and neutral monism: How to make up one’s mind.
In: G. Brüntrup and L. Jaskolla, eds. Panpsychism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
pp. 249–282.
Collins, S. (1982). Selfless Persons: Imagery and Thought in Theravāda Buddhism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Connolly, T. (2015). Doing Philosophy Comparatively. London: Bloomsbury.
Coward, H. (1982). Time (Kāla) in Bhartṛhari’s Vākyapadīya. Journal of Indian Philosophy. 10, 277–287.
Coward, H. and Raja, K., eds. (1990). Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies: The Philosophy of the Grammarians. Vol. 5. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Davidson, D. (1974). On the very idea of a conceptual scheme. Proceedings and Addresses
of the American Philosophical Association. 47, 5–20.
Davidson, D. (1975). Thought and talk. In: S. Guttenplan, ed. Mind and Language. Oxford:
Clarendon Press. pp. 7–23.
Davidson, D. (1982). Rational animals. Dialectica. 36 (4), 317–327.
Dennett, D. (1991). Consciousness Explained. New York: Little, Brown and Co.
Deshpande, M. (1993). The changing notion of śiṣṭa from Patañjali to Bhartṛhari. Asiatische Studien/Études Asiatiques. 47 (1), 92–115.
Dragonetti, C. and Tola, F. (1990). Some remarks on Bhartṛhari’s concept of pratibhā.
Journal of Indian Philosophy. 18, 95–112.
Dravid, N. (1977). The problem of relation in Indian philosophy. Indian Philosophical
Quarterly. 5 (1), 39–52.
Dreyfus, G. (1997). Recognizing Reality: Dharmakīrti’s Philosophy and Its Tibetan Interpreters. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Dreyfus, G. and Thompson, E. (2007). Asian perspectives: Indian theories of mind. In: M.
Moscovitch, E. Thompson, and P.D. Zelazo, eds. The Cambridge Handbook of Consciousness. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 89–116.
Dunne, J. (2004). Foundations of Dharmakīrti’s Philosophy. Boston: Wisdom Publications.
Dunne, J. (2006). Realizing the unreal: Dharmakīrti’s theory of yogic perception. Journal
of Indian Philosophy. 34, 497–519.
Dunne, J. (2011). Key features of Dharmakīrti’s apoha theory. In: M. Siderits, T. Tillemans, and A. Chakrabarti, eds. Apoha: Buddhist Nominalism and Human Cognition.
New York: Columbia University Press. pp. 84–108.
Dwivedi, R.C. (1991). Bhartṛhari and Kashmir Saivism. Annals of the Bhandarkar
Research Institute. 72–73, 95–107.
Dyczkowski, M. (1987). The Doctrine of Vibration: An Analysis of the Doctrines and Practices of Kashmir Shaivism. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Eltschinger, V. (2007). Penser l’autorité des Écritures. La polémique de Dharmakīrti contre la notion brahmanique orthodoxe d’un Veda sans auteur. Autour de Pramāṇavārttika
I. 213–268 et Svavṛtti. Wien: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.

Bibliography 143
Eltschinger, V. (2009). On the career and the cognition of Yogins. In: E. Franco, ed. Yogic
perception, meditation and altered states of consciousness. Wien: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften. pp. 169–213.
Eltschinger, V. (2010). Dharmakīrti. Revue internationale de philosophie. 253, 397–440.
Eltschinger, V. (2014). Buddhist Epistemology as Apologetics. Studies on the History, SelfUnderstanding and Dogmatic Foundations of Late Indian Buddhist Philosophy. Wien:
Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Ferrante, M. (2013). Vṛṣabhadeva’s Sphuṭākṣarā on Bhartṛhari’s metaphysics: Commentarial strategy and new interpretations. Journal of Indian Philosophy. 41 (2), 133–149.
Ferrante, M. (2014). How to obtain salvation through language? Bhartṛhari on
Śabdapūrvayoga. In: A. Keidan, ed. The Study of South Asia between Antiquity and
Modernity: Parallels and Comparisons. Rivista degli Studi Orientali. (Supplemento 2),
161–176.
Ferrante, M. (2015). Vṛṣabhadeva on the status of ordinary phenomena: Between Bhartṛhari
and Advaita Vedānta. Journal of Indian Philosophy. 43 (1), 61–83.
Ferrante, M. (2016). On ṛṣis and yogins: Immediate and Mediate extraordinary cognitions
in early Brahmanical thought. In: R. Torella, M. Franceschini, T. Pontillo, C. Pieruccini,
A. Rigopoulos, and F. Sferra, eds. Proceedings of the Meeting of the Italian Association
of Sanskrit Studies. Rivista degli Studi Orientali. LXXXIX (Supplemento 2), 41–62.
Ferrante, M. (2017a). Bhartṛhari and verbal testimony. A hyper-antireductionist
approach? In: D. Cuneo, E. Freschi, and C. Formigatti, eds. Not Far Afield: Asian Perspectives on Sexuality, Testimony and Print Culture: A Coffee Break Project. Kervan.
21, 227–246.
Ferrante, M. (2017b). Studies on Bhartṛhari and the Pratyabhijñā: The case of svasaṃvedana.
Proceedings of the Conference of the Society for the Tantric Studies. Religions. 8, 145.
Ferrante, M. (2019). Studies on Bhartṛhari and the Pratyabhijñā: Language, knowledge and consciousness. Journal of Indian Philosophy. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10781-019-09412-2.
Ferrante, M. (2020). The place of language in the philosophy of the recognition. In: A.
Graheli, ed. The Bloomsbury Research Handbook of Indian Philosophy of Language.
London: Bloomsbury. pp. 135–149.
Filliozat, P.S. (1994). Bhartṛhari and tantra. In: P.S. Filliozat, C.P. Bhaṭṭa, and S.P.
Narang, eds. Pandit N.R. Bhatt Felicitation Volume. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
pp. 463–480.
Fink, C. (2012). The “scent” of a self: Buddhism and the first-person perspective. Asian
Philosophy. 22, 289–306.
Fodor, J. (1975). The Language of Thought. New York: Crowell.
Fodor, J. (2008). LOT 2: The Language of Thought Revisited. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Franco, E. (1997). Dharmakīrti on Compassion and Rebirth. Wiener Studien zur Tibetologie und Buddhismuskunde 38. Wien: Arbeitskreis für tibetische und buddhistische
Studien Universität Wien.
Franco, E., ed. (2009). Yogic Perception, Meditation and Altered States of Consciousness.
Wien: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Franco, E., ed. (2013). Periodization and Historiography of Indian Philosophy. Wien: Verein Sammlung de Nobili, Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Indologie und Religionsforschung,
Institut für Südasien-, Tibet-und Buddhismuskunde der Universität Wien.
Frauwallner, E. (1961). Landmarks in the history of Indian logic. Wiener Zeitschrift fur die
Kunde Sud-und Ostasiens. 5, 129–132.

144

Bibliography

Funiyama, T. (1994). Remarks on religious predominance in Kashmir: Hindu or Buddhist?
In Y. Ikari, ed. A Study of Nīlamata—Aspects of Hinduism in Ancient Kashmir. Institute
for Research in Humanities. Kyoto: Kyoto University. pp. 367–375.
Ganeri, J. (2001). Philosophy in Classical India: The Proper Work of Reason. London:
Routledge.
Ganeri, J. (2007). The Concealed Art of the Soul: Theories of Self and Practices of Truth in
Indian Ethics and Epistemology. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ganeri, J. (2012). The Self: Naturalism, Consciousness, and the First-Person Stance.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ganeri, J., ed. (2017). The Oxford Handbook of Indian Philosophy. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Garfield, J. (2015). Engaging Buddhism: Why It Matters to Philosophy. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Gaurinath, S. (1959). The Philosophy of Word and Meaning: Some Indian Approaches with
Special Reference to the Philosophy of Bhartṛhari. Sanskrit College Research Series 5.
Calcutta: Calcutta Sanskrit College.
Gennaro, R.J. (1996). Consciousness and Self-Consciousness: A Defense of the HigherOrder Thought Theory of Consciousness. Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Gennaro, R.J. (2005). The HOT theory of consciousness: Between a rock and a hard place?
Journal of Consciousness Studies. 12 (2), 3–21.
Gethin, R. (1998). The Foundations of Buddhism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gnoli, R. (1957). Śivadṛṣṭi by Somānanda: Translation and commentary, chapter I. East
and West. 8, 16–22.
Gnoli, R. (1959). Vāc: Il secondo capitolo della Śivadṛṣṭi di Somānanda. Rivista degli Studi
Orientali. 34, 55–75.
Gnoli, R. (1968). The Aesthetic Experience According to Abhinavagupta. Chowkhamba
Sanskrit Series 62. Varanasi: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Office.
Gnoli, R. (1985). Il commento di Abhinavagupta alla Parātriṃśikā (Parātriṃśikāvivaraṇa).
Traduzione e Testo. Serie Orientale Roma 58. Rome: IsMEO.
Gnoli, R. (1999). Abhinavagupta, Luce dei tantra. Milano: Adelphi.
Goff, P., Seager, W., and Allen-Hermanson, S. (2017). Panpsychism. In: E.N. Zalta, ed. The
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Winter 2017 edition. https://plato.stanford.edu/
archives/win2017/entries/panpsychism/.
Goldman, A. (1993). Consciousness, folk psychology, and cognitive science. Consciousness and Cognition. 2, 364–382.
Halbfass, W. (1989). On Being and What There Is: Classical Vaiśeṣika and the History of
Indian Ontology. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Halbfass, W. (1991). Tradition and Reflection. Explorations in Indian Thoughts. Albany:
State University of New York Press.
Harvey, P. (1995). The Selfless Mind: Personality, Consciousness and Nirvāṇa in Early
Buddhism. London: Routledge Curzon.
Hattori, M. (1968). Dignāga: On Perception, Being the Pratyakṣapariccheda of Dignāga’s
Pramāṇasamuccaya. Harvard Oriental Series 47. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Hattori, M. (1980). Apoha and Pratibhā. In: M. Nagatomi, B.K. Matilal, J.M. Masson,
and E. Dimock, eds. Sanskrit and Indian Studies, Festschrift in Honor of Daniel H.H.
Ingalls. Dordrecht: Reidel. pp. 61–73.
Hattori, M. (1993). Kamalaśīla’s interpretation of some verses in the Vākyakāṇḍa of
Bhartṛhari’s Vākyapadīya. Asiatische Studien/Études Asiatiques. 47 (1), 135–140.

Bibliography 145
Hayes, R. (2009). Sensation, inference and language: Dignāga’s Pramāṇa-sammuccāya. In:
W. Edelglass and J. Garfield, eds. Buddhist Philosophy: Essential Readings. New York:
Oxford University Press. pp. 107–115.
Hayes, R. and Gillon, B. (1991). Introduction to Dharmakīrti’s theory of inference as presented in the Pramāṇavārttika Svopajñāvṛtti 1–10. Journal of Indian Philosophy. 19,
1–73.
Heidegger, M. (1956). What Is Philosophy? William Kluback and Jean T. Wilde, trans.
London: Vision Press.
Herzberger, R. (1986). Bhartṛhari and the Buddhists: An Essay in the Development of Fifth
and Sixth Century Indian Thought. Studies of Classical India 8. Dordecht: Reidel.
Houben, J. (1995a). The Saṃbandha-samuddeśa (Chapter on Relation) and Bhartṛhari’s
Philosophy of Language. Groeningen: Ergbert Forsten.
Houben, J. (1995b). Bhartṛhari’s perspectivism (2): Bhartṛhari on the primary units of language. In: K.D. Dutz and K.A. Forsgren, eds. Proceedings of the Eighth International
Colloque of the Studienkreis Geschichte der Sprachenwissenschaft in Skövde, Sweden,
July 1994. Münster: Nodus Publications. pp. 29–62.
Houben, J. (1997a) Bhartṛhari’s perspectivism (1): The Vṛtti and Bhartṛhari’s perspectivism in the first Kāṇda of the Vākyapadīya. In: K. Preisendanz and E. Franco, eds. Beyond
Orientalism: The Impact of the Work of W. Halbfass on Indian and Crosscultural Studies. Amsterdam: Rodopi. pp. 317–358.
Houben, J. (1997b). Bhartṛhari’s Vākyapadīya and the ancient Vṛtti (2): The Vedic background of the author of the Vākyapadīya-Vṛtti. Studien zur Indologie und Iranistik. 21,
71–77.
Houben, J. (1997c). Bhartṛhari’s Vākyapadīya and the ancient Vṛtti (1): The Vṛtti and
Vṛṣabhadeva’s Paddhati on Vākyapadīya 1.46a ātmabhedaṃ/ātmabhedas. Annals of the
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. 78, 177–200.
Ikari, Y., ed. (1994). A Study of Nīlamata: Aspects of Hinduism in Ancient Kashmir. Kyoto:
Kyoto University, Institute for Research in Humanities.
Iyer, K.A.S. (1964). Bhartṛhari on vyākaraṇa as a means of attaining mokṣa. Adyar Library
Bulletin. 28, 112–132.
Iyer, K.A.S. (1965). The Vākyapadīya of Bhartṛhari with the Vṛtti. Chapter I. English
Translation. Pune: Deccan College.
Iyer, K.A.S. (1969). Bhartṛhari: A Study of the Vākyapadīya in the Light of the Ancient
Commentaries. Pune: Deccan College.
Iyer, K.A.S. (1971). The Vākyapadīya of Bhartṛhari. Chapter III, Part I. English Translation. Pune: Deccan College.
Iyer, K.A.S. (1974). The Vākyapadīya of Bhartṛhari. Chapter III, Part II. English Translation. Pune: Deccan College.
Jha, G. (1911). The Prabhākara School of Pūrva Mīmāṃsā. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Jha, G. (1964). Pūrva-Mīmāṃsā in Its Sources. Second edition. Varanasi: Banaras Hindu
University.
Jha, G. (1973). Śābarabhāṣya. 3 Vols. Gaekwad’s Oriental Series 66. Baroda: University
of Baroda Press.
Kahrs, E. (1999). Indian Semantic Analysis: The Nirvacana Tradition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kahrs, E. (2013). Action, being and brahman. The Journal of Hindu Studies. 6, 317–332.
Kar, B. (1978). The Theories of Error in Indian Philosophy, an Analytical Study. New
Delhi: Ajanta Books International.

146

Bibliography

Kataoka, K. (2003). The Mīmāṃsā definition of pramāṇa as a source of new information.
Journal of Indian Philosophy. 31, 89–103.
Katsura, S. (1984). Dharmakīrti’s theory of truth. Journal of Indian Philosophy. 12,
215–235.
Katsura, S. (1991). Dignāga and Dharmakīrti on apoha. In: E. Steinkellner, ed. Studies in Buddhist Epistemological Tradition: Proceedings of the Second International
Dharmakīrti Conference, Vienna, June 11–16, 1989. Wien: Österreichische Akademie
der Wissenschaften. pp. 129–146.
Kawajiri, Y. (2016a). New fragments of the Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivṛti. In: R. Torella and
B. Bäumer, eds. Utpaladeva: Philosopher of Recognition. Shimla: Indian Institute of
Advanced Studies. New Delhi: D.K. Printworld. pp. 77–101.
Kawajiri, Y. (2016b). New fragments of the Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivṛti (3). Nagoya Studies
in Indian Culture and Buddhism. Saṃbhāṣā. 33, 17–46.
Kellner, B. (1997a). Nichts bleibt nichts. Die buddhistische Zurückweisung von Kumārilas
abhāvapramāṇa. Übersetzung und Interpretation von Śāntarakṣitas Tattvasaṅgraha vv.
1647–1690 mit Kamalaśīlas Tattvasaṃgrahapañjikā sowie Ansätze und Arbeitshypothesen zur Geschichte negativer Erkenntnis in der indischen Philosophie. Wien: Wiener
Studien zur Tibetologie und Buddhismuskunde 39.
Kellner, B. (1997b). Non-cognition (anupalabdhi)-perception or inference? The views of
Dharmottara and Jñānaśrimitra. Tetsukagu. 49, 121–134.
Kellner, B. (2009). Towards a critical edition of Dharmakīrti’s Pramāṇavārttika. Wiener
Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens. 52, 161–211.
Kellner, B. (2010). Self-awareness (svasaṃvedana) in Dignāga’s Pramāṇasamuccaya and
-vṛtti: A close reading. Journal of Indian Philosophy. 38, 203–231.
Kellner, B. (2011). Self-awareness (svasaṃvedana) and infinite regress: A comparison of
arguments by Dignāga and Dharmakīrti. Journal of Indian Philosophy. 39, 411–426.
Kellner, B. (2017). Proofs of idealism in Indian Buddhist epistemology: Dharmakīrti’s
refutation of external objects. In: J. Tuske, ed. Indian Epistemology and Metaphysics.
London: Bloomsbury. pp. 103–128.
Krasser, H. (2012). Bhāviveka, Dharmakīrti and Kumārila. In: F. Voegeli, V. Eltschinger,
D. Feller, M.P. Candotti, B. Diaconescu, and M. Kulkarni, eds. Devadattīyam. Johannes
Bronkhorst Felicitation Volume. Bern: Peter Lang. pp. 535–594.
Kriegel, U. (2003). Consciousness as intransitive self-consciousness: Two views and an
argument. Canadian Journal of Philosophy. 33, 103–132.
Kriegel, U. (2004). Consciousness and self-consciousness. The Monist. 87 (2), 182–205.
Kriegel, U. (2009). Subjective Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kuhn, T.S. (1962). The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Kusambi, D.D. (1948). The Epigrams Attributed to Bhartṛhari Including the Three Centuries for the First Time Collected and Critically Edited, with Principal Variants and an
Introduction. Bombay: Bharatīya Vidyā Bhavan.
Lawrence, D.P. (1999). Rediscovering God with Transcendental Argument: A Contemporary Interpretation of Monistic Kashmiri Śaiva Philosophy. Albany: State University of
New York Press.
Lindtner, C. (1993). Linking up Bhartṛhari and the Bauddhas. Asiatische Studien/Études
Asiatiques. 47 (1), 195–213.
Lycan, W.G. (1996). Consciousness and Experience. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lycan, W.G. (1997). Consciousness as internal monitoring. In: N. Block, O. Flanagan, and
G. Güzeldere, eds. The Nature of Consciousness: Philosophical Debates. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press. pp. 775–771.

Bibliography 147
Lycan, W.G. (2004). The superiority of HOP to HOT. In: R. Gennaro, ed. Higher-Order
Theories of Consciousness. Philadelphia: John Benjamins. pp. 93–113.
Matilal, B.K. (1985). Logic, Language and Reality: An Introduction to Indian Philosophical Studies. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Matilal, B.K. (1986). Perception: An Essay on Classical Indian Theories of Knowledge.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Matilal, B.K. (1991). The Word and the World. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Matilal, B.K. (1998). The Character of Logic in India. Albany: State University of New
York Press.
Mohan, K. (1981). Early Medieval History of Kashmir. New Delhi: Meharchand Lachhmandas Publications.
Mohanty, J.N. (2000). Classical Indian Philosophy. Lanham: Rowman and Littlefield.
Moore, G.E. (1903). The refutation of idealism. Mind. 12, 433–453.
Nagel, B.M.J. (1995), Unity and contradiction: Some arguments in Utpaladeva and
Abhinavagupta for the evidence of the self as Śiva. Philosophy East and West. 45 (4),
501–525.
Nagel, T. (1974). What is it like to be a bat. The Philosophical Review. 83 (4), 435–450.
Nagel, T. (1979). Mortal Questions. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nakamura, H. (1983). A History of Early Vedānta Philosophy, Part I. New Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass.
Nakamura, H. (2004). A History of Early Vedānta Philosophy, Part II. New Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass.
Nemec, J. (2005). Śaiva Arguments Against the Grammarians: Somānanda’s Śivadṛṣṭi,
Chapters One and Two. Doctoral dissertation, University of Pennsylvania.
Nemec, J. (2011). The Ubiquitous Śiva: Somānanda’s Śivadṛṣṭi and His Tantric Interlocutors. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Oberhammer, G., Prets, E., and Prandstetter, J. (1996). Terminologie der frühen philosophischen Scholastik in Indien. Wien: Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Olson, E.T. (2017). Personal Identity: The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. E.N.
Zalta, ed. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2017/entries/identity-personal/.
Padoux, A. (1990). Vāc. The Concept of the Word in Selected Hindu Tantras. Albany: State
University of New York Press.
Padoux, A. (2010). Comprendre le tantrisme. Les sources hindoues. Paris: Albin Michel.
Pandey, K.C. (1954). Bhāskarī. An English Translation of the Īśvara Pratyabhijñā
Vimarśinī in the Light of the Bhāskarī with an Outline of the History of Śaiva Philosophy. 3 Vols. Lucknow: Princess of Wales Saraswati Bhavana Texts 84.
Pandey, K.C. (1963 [2000]). Abhinavagupta: An Historical and Philosphical Study. Second edition. Varanasi: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Office.
Pandey, K.C. and Dwivedi, R.C. (1986). An Outline of the History of Śaiva Philosophy.
New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Pandit, B.N. (1997). Specific Principles of Kashmir Shaivism. New Delhi: Munshiram
Manoharlal.
Parfit, D. (1986). Reasons and Persons. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Park, P. (2013). Africa Asia and the History of Philosophy: Racism in the formation of the
Philosophical Canon. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Parson, T. (2001). Bhartṛhari on What Cannot Be Said. Philosophy East and West. 51 (4),
525–534.
Patnaik T. (1994). Śabda: A Study of Bhartṛhari’s Philosophy of Language. New Delhi:
D.K. Printworld.

148

Bibliography

Perrett, R. (2016). An Introduction to Indian Philosophy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Pind, O.H. (2003). Did Dignāga and Mallavādin know the old Vākyapadīya-vṛtti attribute
to Bhartṛhari? Journal of Indian Philosophy. 31, 257–270.
Pitt, D. (2000). Mental representation. In: E.N. Zalta, ed. The Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2018/entries/mental-representation/.
Potter, K.H. (1984). Does Indian epistemology concern justified true belief? Journal of
Indian Philosophy. 12, 307–327.
Potter, K.H. (1991). Presuppositions of India’s Philosophies. New Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass.
Radicchi, A. (1993). Vivakṣā in the Vākyapadīya. Asiatische Studien/Études Asiatiques.
47 (1), 221–233.
Raghavan, V. (1942). Studies on Some Concepts of the Ālaṃkāra Śāstra. Madras: Adyar
Library & Research Centre.
Raghavan, V. (1980). Abhinavagupta and His Works. Chaukhambha Oriental Research
Studies, No. 20. Varanasi: Chokhambha Orientalia.
Raja, K. (1963). Indian Theories of Meaning. Madras: Adyar Library and Research Centre.
Ramseier, Y. (1993). Bibliography on Bhartṛhari. Asiatische Studien/Études Asiatiques. 47
(1), 37–43.
Rastogi, N. (1977). Recognition in the Pratyabhijñā school: A study in epistemology.
Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. 58–59, 841–861.
Rastogi, N. (1979). The Krama Tantricism of Kashmir: Historical and General Sources.
New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Rastogi, N. (1986). Theory of error according to Abhinavagupta. Journal of Indian Philosophy. 14 (1), 1–34.
Rastogi, N. (1987). Introduction to the Tantrāloka: A Study in Structure. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Rastogi, N. (2003). Re-accessing Abhinavagupta. In: N.B. Patil and M. Kaul, eds. The Variegated Plumage: Encounters with Indian Philosophy. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
pp. 135–153.
Rastogi, N. (2009). Vāk as Pratyavamarśa: Bhartṛhari from Abhinavan perspective. In: M.
Chaturvedi, ed. Bhartṛhari: Language, Thought and Reality. Proceedings of the International Seminar. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. pp. 301–341.
Ratié, I. (2007). Otherness in the Pratyabhijñā philosophy. Journal of Indian Philosophy.
35, 313–370.
Ratié, I. (2009). Remarks on compassion and altruism in the Pratyabhijñā philosophy.
Journal of Indian Philosophy. 37, 349–366.
Ratié, I. (2010). The dreamer and the yogin: On the relationship between Buddhist and
Śaiva idealisms. Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies. 73 (3), 437–478.
Ratié, I. (2011a). Le Soi et l’Autre. Identité, différence et altérité dans la philosophie de la
Pratyabhijñā. Leiden and Boston: Brill.
Ratié, I. (2011b). Can one prove that something exists beyond consciousness? Journal of
Indian Philosophy. 39 (4–5), 479–501.
Ratié, I. (2015). Some hitherto unknown fragments of Utpaladeva’s Vivṛti (I): On the
Buddhist controversy over the existence of other conscious streams. In: R. Torella and
B. Bäumer, eds. Utpaladeva: Philosopher of Recognition. Shimla: Indian Institute of
Advanced Studies. New Delhi: D.K. Printworld. pp. 224–256.
Ratié, I. (2016). Some hitherto unknown fragments of Utpaladeva’s Vivṛti (III): On memory and error. In: E. Franco and I. Ratié, eds. Around Abhinavagupta. Aspects of the

Bibliography 149
Intellectual History of Kashmir from the Ninth to the Eleventh Century. Zurich: Lit Verlag. pp. 375–400.
Ratié, I. (2017). In search of Utpaladeva’s lost Vivṛti on the Pratyabhijñā treatise: A report
on the latest discoveries (with the Vivṛti on the end of Chapter 1.8). Journal of Indian
Philosophy. 45 (1), 163–189.
Ratié, I. (2018). On the Ṣaḍdhātusamīkṣā, a lost work attributed to Bhartŗhari: An examination of testimonies and a list of fragments. Journal of the American Oriental Society.
138 (4), 709–741.
Rosenthal, D.M. (1986). Two concepts of consciousness. Philosophical Studies. 49 (3),
329–359.
Rosenthal, D.M. (2002). Explaining consciousness. In: D. Chalmers, ed. Philosophy of
Mind: Classical and Contemporary Readings. New York: Oxford University Press.
pp. 406–421.
Rosenthal, D.M. (2005). The higher-order model of consciousness. In: R. Carter, ed. Consciousness. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press. pp. 45–47.
Rosenthal, D.M. (2009). Higher-order theories of consciousness. In: B.P. McLaughlin, A.
Beckermann, and S. Walter, eds. The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Mind. Oxford:
Oxford University Press. pp. 239–252.
Russell, B. (1912). The Problems of Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Russell, B. (1945). A History of Western Philosophy. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Saccone, S. (2018). On the Nature of Things—A Buddhist Debate on Cognitions and Their
Object. Wien: Wiener Studien zur Tibetologie und Buddhismuskunde 94, Arbeitskreis
für tibetische und buddhistische Studien, Universität Wien.
Samuel, G. (2008). The Origins of Yoga and Tantra: Indic Religions to the Thirteenth Century. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sanderson, A. (1985). Purity and power among the Brahmins of Kashmir. In: S. Collins,
M. Carrithers, and S. Lukes, eds. The Category of the Person: Anthropology, Philosophy
and History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 190–216.
Sanderson, A. (1988). Śaivism and the tantric traditions. In: S. Sutherland, L. Houlden,
P. Clarke, and F. Hardy, eds. The World’s Religions. London: Routledge. pp. 660–704.
Sanderson, A. (2007). The Śaiva exegesis of Kashmir. In: D. Goodall and A. Padoux, eds.
Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d’Hélène Brunner/Tantric Studies in Memory of
Hélène Brunner. Pondicherry: Institut Française de Pondichéry. pp. 231–442.
Sanderson, A. (2009a). Kashmir. In: K.A. Jacobsen, ed. Brill’s Encyclopedia of Hinduism.
Volume One: Regions, Pilgrimage, Deities. pp. 99–126. Leiden: Brill.
Sanderson, A. (2009b). The Śaiva Age. In: S. Einoo, ed. The Genesis and Development
of Tantrism. Institute of Oriental Culture Special Series 23. Tokyo: Institute of Oriental
Culture, University of Tokyo. pp. 41–350.
Sarma, E. (1986). Bhartṛhari as an Advaitin. Adyar Library Bulletin. 50, 579–585.
Schmithausen, L. (1987). Ālayavijñāna: On the Origin and the Early Development of a Central Concept of Yogācāra Philosophy. Tokyo: International Institute for Buddhist Studies.
Searle, J.R. (2002). Consciousness and Language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sen, A. (2005). The Argumentative Indian: Writings on Indian History, Culture and Identity. London: Macmillan.
Seyfort Ruegg, D. (1959). Contributions à l’histoire de la philosophie linguistique indienne. Paris: Édition de Boccard (Publication de l’Institut de civilisation indienne 7).
Sharma, P.S. (1972). The Kālasamuddeśa of Bhartṛhari’s Vākyapadīya (Together with
Helarāja’s Commentary). Translated from the Sanskrit for the First Time. New Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass.

150

Bibliography

Shulman, D. (2010). Notes on Camatkāra. In: D. Shulman, ed. Language, Ritual and Poetics in Ancient India and Iran: Studies in Honor of Shaul Migron. Jerusalem: Israel Academy of Sciences and Humanities. pp. 257–284.
Siderits, M. (2003). Personal Identity and Buddhist Philosophy: Empty Persons. Aldershot: Ashgate Publishing Ltd.
Siderits, M. (2007). Buddhism as Philosophy. Aldershot: Ashgate Publishing Ltd.
Siderits, M., Tillemans, T., and Chakrabarti, A., eds. (2011). Apoha: Buddhist Nominalism
and Human Cognition. New York: Columbia University Press.
Singh, J. (1963). The Pratyabhijñāhṛdaya. Transl. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Singh, J. (1979a). The Vijñānabhairava. Transl. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Singh, J. (1979b). Śiva Sūtras: The Yoga of Supreme Identity. Transl. New Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass.
Singh, J. (1994). The Spandakārikās: The Divine Creative Pulsation. Transl. New Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass.
Stcherbatsky, T. (1993 [1930–1932]). Buddhist Logic. 2 Vols. New Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass.
Stein, M.A. (1989 [1892]). Kalhaṇa’s Rājataraṅgiṇī: A Chronicle of the Kings of Kashmir.
2 Vols. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Steinkellner, E. (1967). Dharmakīrti’s Hetubindu. Wien: Österreichische Akademie der
Wissenschaften.
Steinkellner, E. (1973). Dharmakīrti’s Prāmaṇaviniścaya.Zweites Kapitel: svārthānu­
mānam. Teil I, Tibetischer Text und Sanskrittexte. Wien: Österreichische Akademie der
Wissenschaften.
Steinkellner, E., ed. (1991). Studies in Buddhist Epistemological Tradition: Proceedings
of the Second International Dharmakīrti Conference, Vienna, June 11–16, 1989. Wien:
Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Steinkellner, E. (2005). Dignāga’s Pramāṇasamuccaya. Chapter 1. A hypothetical reconstruction of the Sanskrit text with the help of the two Tibetan translations on the basis
of the hitherto known Sanskrit fragments and the linguistic materials gained from Jinendrabuddhi’s Ṭīkā. www.ikga.oeaw.ac.at/Mat/dignaga_PS_1.pdf.
Steinkellner, E. and Much, T. (1995). Texte der erkenntnistheoretischen Schule des Buddhismus. Systematische Übersicht über die buddhistische Sanskrit-Literatur II/Systematic Survey of Buddhist Sanskrit-Literature II, Abhandlungen der Akademie der
Wissenschaften in Göttingen. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
Strawson, G. (2006). Realistic materialism: Why physicalism entails panpsychism. Journal of Consciousness Studies. 13 (10–11), 3–31.
Strawson, G. (2009). The self. In: B.P. McLaughlin, A. Beckermann, and S. Walter,
eds. The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
pp. 541–564.
Strawson, P.F. (1963). Individuals. London: Methuen.
Taber, J. (1986). Utpaladeva’s Īśvarasiddhi. Adyar Library Bulletin. 52, 106–137.
Taber, J. (1990). The Mīmāṃsā theory of self-recognition. Philosophy East and West. 40
(1), 35–57.
Taber, J. (1992). What did Kumārila Bhaṭṭa mean by Svataḥ Prāmāṇya? Journal of the
American Oriental Society. 112 (2), 204–221.
Taber, J. (2004). A Hindu Critique of Buddhist Epistemology: Kumārila on Perception. The
‘Determination of Perception’ Chapter of Kumārila Bhaṭṭa’s Ślokavārttika, Translation
and Commentary. London and New York: Routledge Curzon.

Bibliography 151
Tāntrikābhidhānakośa I (TAK). (2000). Tāntrikābhidhānakośa I. Dictionnaire des termes
techniques de la littérature hindoue tantrique/A Dictionary of Technical Terms from
Hindu Tantric Literature. Wörterbuch zur Terminologie hinduistischer Tantren. Sous la
direction de H. Brunner, G. Oberhammer et A. Padoux. Österreucguscge Akademie der
Wissenschaften, Philosophisch-historische Klasse, Sitzungsberichte 681, Beiträge zur
Kultur- und Geistesgeschichte Asiens 35. Vienna: Verlag der österreichischen Akademie
der Wissenschaften.
Tāntrikābhidhānakośa II (TAK). (2004). Tāntrikābhidhānakośa II. Dictionnaire des termes
techniques de la littérature hindoue tantrique/A Dictionary of Technical Terms from
HinduTantric Literature. Wörterbuch zur Terminologie hinduistischer Tantren. Sous la
direction de H. Brunner, G. Oberhammer et A. Padoux. Österrechische Akademie der
Wissenschaften, Philosophisch-historische Klasse, Sitzungsberichte 714, Beiträge zur
Kultur- und Geistesgeschichte Asiens 44. Vienna: Verlag der österreichischen Akademie
der Wissenschaften.
Tillemans, T. (1999a). Dharmakīrti’s Pramāṇavārttika: An Annotated Translation of the
Fourth Chapter (Parārthānumāna). Vol. I. Vienna: Österreichische Akademie der
Wissenschaten.
Tillemans, T. (1999b). Scripture, Logic, Language: Essays on Dharmakīrti and His Tibetan
Successors. Boston: Wisdom.
Timalsina, S. (2009a). Consciousness in Indian Philosophy. London and New York:
Routledge.
Timalsina, S. (2009b). Bhartṛhari and Maṇḍana on Avidyā. Journal of Indian Philosophy.
37 (4), 367–382.
Todeschini, A. (2010). Bhartṛhari’s view of the pramāṇas in the Vākyapadīya. Asian Philosophy. 20 (1), 97–109.
Torella, R. (1979). Due capitoli del Sarvadarśanasaṃgraha: Śaivadarśana e
Pratyabhijñādarśana. Rivista degli Studi Orientali. 53 (3–4), 361–410.
Torella, R. (1987). Examples of the influence of Sanskrit grammar on Indian philosophy.
East and West. 37, 131–143.
Torella, R. (1988). A fragment of Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivṛti. East and West.
38, 137–174.
Torella, R. (1992). The Pratyabhijñā and the logical-epistemological school of Buddhism.
In: T. Goudriaan, ed. Ritual and Speculation in Early Tantrism: Studies in Honor of
André Padoux. Albany: State University of New York Press. pp. 327–346.
Torella, R. (1998). The Kañcukas in the Śaiva and Vaiṣṇava tantric tradition: A few considerations between theology and grammar. In: G. Oberhammer, ed. Studies in Hinduism
II: Miscellanea to the Phenomenon of the Tantras. Wien: Verlag der Österreichischen
Akademie der Wissenschaften. pp. 55–86.
Torella, R., ed. (2001). The word in Abhinavagupta’s Bṛhad-vimarśinī. In: R. Torella, ed.
Le parole e i marmi. Studi in onore di Raniero Gnoli nel suo 70° compleanno. Serie
Orientale Roma 92 (1–2). Roma: Istituto Italiano per l’Africa e l’Oriente. pp. 853–874.
Torella, R. (2002). The Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikā of Utpaladeva with the Author’s Vṛtti:
Critical Edition and Annotated Translation. Second edition. New Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass.
Torella, R. (2004). How is verbal signification possible: Understanding Abhinavagupta’s
reply. Journal of Indian Philosophy. 32, 173–188.
Torella, R. (2007a). Studies on Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivṛti. Part I. Anupalabdhi
and Apoha in a Śaiva Garb. In: K. Preisendanz, ed. Expanding and Merging Horizons:

152

Bibliography

Contributions to South Asian and Cross-Cultural Studies in Commemoration of Wilhelm
Halbfass. Wien: Österreichishce Akademie der Wissenschaften. pp. 473–490.
Torella, R. (2007b). Studies in the Īśvarapratyabhijñāvivṛti. Part II. What is memory? In:
J.U. Hartmann and K. Klaus, eds. Indica et Tibetica. Festschrift für Michael Hahn zum
65. Geburtstag von Freunden und Schülern überreicht. Wien: Arbeitskreis für Tibetische
und Buddhistische Studien, Universität Wien. pp. 539–564.
Torella, R. (2007c). Studies on Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñāvivṛti. Part III. Can a
cognition become the object of another cognition? In: D. Goodall and A. Padoux, eds.
Mélanges tantrique à la mémoire d’Hélène Brunner. Tantric Studies in Honor of Hélène
Brunner. Pondicherry: Institut Français de Pondichéry/École Française d’Extrême-Orient. pp. 475–484.
Torella, R. (2007d). Studies in Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñāvivṛti. Part IV. Light of the
subject—Light of the object. In: B. Kellner, ed. Pramāṇakīrtiḥ. Papers Dedicated to
Ernst Steinkellner on the Occasion of his 70th Birthday. Wiener Studien zur Tibetologie
und Buddhismuskunde 70 (1–2). Wien: Arbeitskreis für tibetische und buddhistische
Studien, Universität Wien. pp. 925–939.
Torella, R. (2008). From an adversary to the main ally: The place of Bhartṛhari in the
Kashmirian Śaiva Advaita. In: M. Kaul and A. Aklujkar, eds. The Linguistic Traditions
of Kashmir: Essays in Memory of Pandit Dinanath Yaksha. New Delhi: D.K. Printworld.
pp. 508–524.
Torella, R. (2012a). Studies on Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivṛti. Part V: Self awareness and yogic perception. In: F. Voegeli, V. Eltschinger, D. Feller, M.P. Candotti, B.
Diaconescu, and M. Kulkarni, eds. Devadattīyam. Johannes Bronkhorst Felicitation
Volume. Bern: Peter Lang. pp. 275–300.
Torella, R. (2012b). Observations on Yogipratyakṣa. In: C. Watanabe, M. Desmarais, and
Y. Honda, eds. Saṃskṛta-sādhutā, Goodness of Sanskrit, Studies in Honour of Professor
Ashok Aklujkar. New Delhi: DK Printworld. pp. 470–487.
Torella, R. (2013). Inherited cognitions: Prasiddhi, āgama, pratibhā, śabdana. Bhartṛhari,
Utpaladeva, Abhinavagupta, Kumārila and Dharmakīrti in dialogue. In: V. Eltschinger
and H. Krasser, eds. Scriptural Authority, Reason and Action. Proceedings of a Panel
at the 14th World Sanskrit Conference. Wien: Verlag der Österreichische Akademie der
Wissenschaften. pp. 455–480.
Torella, R. (2014). Utpaladeva’s lost Vivṛti on the Īśvarapratyabhijñā—kārikā’. Journal of
Indian Philosophy. 42, 115–126.
Urban, H. (2003). Tantra: Secrecy, Sex, Politics, and Power in the Study of Religion.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Varma, S.K. (1976). Śabdapūrvayoga. In: S.K. Varma, ed. Studies in Indology. New Delhi:
Bharatiya Prakashan. pp. 238–247.
Vergiani, V. (2012). Bhartṛhari’s views on liminal perception and self-awareness. In: C.
Watanabe, M. Desmarais, and Y. Honda, eds. Saṃskṛta-sādhutā, Goodness of Sanskrit,
Studies in Honour of Professor Ashok Aklujkar. New Delhi: DK Printworld. pp. 509–527.
Vergiani, V. (2016). Helārāja on omniscience, āgama, and the origin of language. In: E.
Franco and I. Ratié, eds. Around Abhinavagupta. Aspects of the Intellectual History of
Kashmir from the Ninth to the Eleventh Century. Zurich: Lit Verlag. pp. 531–608.
Vergiani, V. (2017). Bhartrḥari on language, perception, and consciousness. In: J. Ganeri,
ed. The Oxford Handbook of Indian Philosophy. New York: Oxford University Press.
pp. 231–252.
Vetter, T. (1966). Dharmakīrti’s Pramāṇaviniścayaḥ 1. Kapitel: Pratyakṣam. Einleitung,
Text der tibetischen übersetzung, Sanskritfragmente, deutsche übersetzung. Wien: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.

Bibliography 153
Wallis, C. (2007). The descent of power: Possession, mysticism, and initiation in the Śaiva
theology of Abhinavagupta. Journal of Indian Philosophy. 36 (2), 248–249.
Watson, A. (2006). The Self’s Awareness of Itself: Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha’s Arguments Against
the Buddhist Doctrine of No-Self. Publications of the De Nobili Research Library, 32.
Wien: De Nobili Research Library.
Westerhoff, J. (2018). The Golden Age of Indian Buddhist Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Wezler, A. (2001). Some remarks on Nirukta 1.20 sākṣātkṛtadharmāṇaṛṣayo, etc. In:
A. Michaels, ed. The Pandit: Traditional Scholarship in India. New Delhi: Manohar.
pp. 215–248.
White, D.G. (1996). The Alchemical Body: Siddha Traditions in Medieval India. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
White, D.G., ed. (2000). Tantra in Practice. Princeton Readings in Religions. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
White, D.G. (2003). Kiss of the Yoginī: ‘Tantric Sex’ in its South Asian Contexts. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
White, D.G. (2009). Sinister Yogis. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Williams, P. (1998). The Reflexive Nature of Awareness: A Tibetan Madhyamaka Defence.
Richmond: Curzon.
Williams, P. and Tribe, A. (2000). Buddhist Thought: A Complete Introduction to the Indian
Tradition. London: Routledge.
Williamson, T. (2000). Knowledge and Its Limits. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wynne, A. (2010). The ātman and its negation: A conceptual and chronological analysis
of early Buddhist thought. Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies.
33 (1–2), 103–171.
Yao, Z. (2005). The Buddhist Theory of Self-Cognition. London and New York: Routledge.

Index

Abhinavagupta 1, 6, 12 – 14, 21 – 23, 25,
37, 41 – 42, 45 – 48, 57 – 58, 75 – 82,
84 – 87, 89, 98 – 102, 105 – 106, 109 – 112
Advaita Vedānta 8, 18, 24, 36, 96, 103
Aklujkar, Ashok 8, 23 – 25, 80
Anti-Emergence Argument 104
anumāna (inference) 17, 33, 80, 100
anupalabdhi (non-perception) 33, 37, 47
anusaṃdhāna (conceptual unification) 58
anuvyavasāya (successive
determination) 39
arthakriyā (causal efficiency) 66 – 67
Bermúdez, José Luis 71 – 73
Bhartṛhari: conception of consciousness
67 – 69, 73 – 74; general information
18 – 19; levels of language 21, 65 – 66,
81; on means of knowledge 80; works
19 – 21
Bhaṭṭa Kallaṭa 11
Biardeau, Madeleine 24 – 25
Bronkhorst, Johannes 12, 24 – 25
camatkāra (savouring) 42, 76, 81, 84 – 90,
94 – 95, 110
causal closure of the physical domain 103
cognition see knowledge
combination problem (panpsychism)
104 – 105
comparative philosophy: descriptive and
constructive approaches 3 – 4; exclusion
viewpoint 2; general discussion 2 – 3;
non-Greek origin of philosophy 8; onesidedness criticism 3 – 6; universalistic
approach 4
computationalism 65 – 66, 83
Connolly, Tim 2 – 6
consciousness: criticism of higher-order
theories of consciousness 88; higherorder theories of consciousness 67 – 69;

and metaphor of light 115; relationship
with language 63 – 64, 69, 76 – 77;
relationship with self-consciousness
91 – 95, 107; and reportability 70, 110;
subjective character of consciousness
50, 78, 82, 88, 117 – 118
creature consciousness 91 – 92, 94 – 95
curatorial approach to Indian philosophy
4–5
Davidson, Donald: against the notion of
conceptual scheme 9; intersubjective
truth 71; lingualism 70 – 73
Descartes, Rene 82 – 83, 105
Dharmakīrti 17, 24, 33, 36, 40 – 41, 50 – 53,
57, 60, 62, 74, 80, 99 – 100
Dignāga 17, 19, 23 – 24, 33, 40 – 41,
46 – 47, 50 – 52, 60, 79
Dunne, John 31
ekapratyavamarśa (unitary
judgment) 17
Eltschinger, Vincent 23
emergentism 95, 104
Exhaustiveness Principle 30 – 31, 43
exoticist approach to Indian philosophy
4 – 5, 9
Fodor, Jerry 65 – 66, 72
functionalism 65, 83
Ganeri, Jonardon 8, 95 – 98, 102 – 103,
105, 108
genetic argument (panpsychism) 104
Gennaro, Rocco J. 74, 88 – 89
grammarians 21, 65, 116
Helārāja 20 – 21, 25, 53 – 57, 60 – 62, 89,
112, 115 – 117, 129 – 131
Houben, Jan 8, 24 – 25, 62

Index 155
incredulous stare (argument) 104
inference see anumāna (inference)
interlocutory approach to Indian
philosophy 4 – 5
intrinsic nature of the universe
(argument) 104
inverted spectrum argument 89
jñāna see knowledge
Kamalaśīla 46, 50 – 52, 59 – 60
Kātyāyana 19
Kellner, Birgit 24, 36, 47, 62
knowledge: criterion for reliable
knowledge 66 – 67; in Euro-American
philosophy 64; in Indian philosophy
(jñāna) 64, 74; liminal cognitions 68;
non-objectifiable 58, 63; self-confined
42, 45, 48, 102, 117, 120 – 121
knowledge of knowledge see svasaṃvedana
(cognitions’ self-awareness)
Krasser, Helmut 24
Kriegel, Uriah 74, 92 – 94, 107
Kumārila 23, 51, 62
language: and direct perception 77,
127 – 128; language of thought (LoT)
65 – 66, 70, 72 – 73, 83, 110; relationship
with thought 70 – 73
levels of truth (Buddhism) 31
Locke, John 106 – 107
Madhyamaka (Buddhist tradition) 50 – 53,
59, 96
madhyamā vāc 23, 65 – 66
magisterial approach to Indian philosophy
4–5
Mary’s room’s argument (knowledge
argument) 89
Matilal, B.K. 39, 41
māyā 76 – 78, 86, 90, 102, 120 – 122, 124, 126
memory 7, 32, 34 – 38, 41 – 49, 51 – 52, 58,
95, 98, 113, 126, 127
micro and macro levels (philosophy of
mind) 83, 95 – 96, 103 – 105
micro level subjects 103, 104
Mīṃāṃsā 12, 17, 23 – 24, 36, 39 – 40, 51,
59, 64, 66, 79 – 80
mind and body interaction 103, 105
Mokṣākaragupta 60
Nagel, Thomas 84, 104
nairātmyavāda (theory that a self does not
exist): argument from control 26 – 30;

argument from impermanence 31 – 32;
arguments from the īpk 32 – 36
naturalism (philosophy of mind) 83
Nemec, John 11, 21 – 23, 90
non-perception see anupalabdhi
(non-perception)
non-self see nairātmyavāda (theory that a
self does not exist)
Nyāya 8, 12, 17, 23, 36, 39 – 40, 64, 66,
79 – 80, 96, 100
Pāṇini 19
pan-protopsychism 106
panpsychism 1, 7, 101, 103 – 106,
109, 111, 112
parasaṃvedana 39
parataḥprāmaṇya 80
Park, Peter 8
paśyantī vāc 21, 23, 65 – 66
Patañjali (grammarian) 19
perception see pratyakṣa (direct
perception)
Perrett, Roy 4 – 5, 8, 67
physicalism 83, 103 – 105
Prabhākara 24, 39 – 40, 59
prakāśa 45, 76, 78, 87, 110
pramā (veridical cognition) 17, 74
Pramāṇavāda (Buddhist school of logic
and epistemology) 12, 16 – 18, 32 – 33,
39, 41, 46
Pratyabhijñā: general information 11 – 16;
theory of consciousness 75 – 79
pratyakṣa (direct perception) 17, 33,
39, 80
property dualism 83
propositional attitudes 70 – 71
Pure-Consciousness Views 95 – 98,
102 – 103
qualia 82, 84, 87; and higher-order
thought 87
Ratié, Isabelle 8, 22, 24, 98 – 99, 101
Rosenthal, David 68, 70, 88, 91 – 92
Ṣaddhātusamikṣā 24
Śaiva-siddhānta 11 – 13
Śālikanātha Miśra 39
Sāṃkhya 12, 35, 67
saṃskāra (trace, impression) 28, 34 – 36,
44 – 45, 98, 110
Sanderson, Alexis 10 – 12, 22 – 23
Śāntarakṣita 7, 46, 50 – 53, 58 – 60
Śatakatrayam 24

156

Index

self: Euro-American views 106 – 107;
Indian views 95 – 96; limited self
(Pratyabhijñā) 123 – 124; manifestation
of self from consciousness 125 – 126
self-consciousness 91 – 94, 107
Siderits, Mark 28 – 31, 43
Śivasūtra 11
solipsism 96, 98 – 99, 101, 107
Somānanda 6, 11, 15, 21, 24, 85, 112
Spandakārikā 11
state consciousness 91 – 94, 104
Strawson, Galen 104
Strawson, Peter 96 – 97
substance dualism 83
supervenience 63, 83 – 84
svalakṣaṇa 17
svasaṃvedana (cognitions’ selfawareness): in Bhartṛhari 50, 53 – 56; in
Dharmakīrti 41, 47; in Dignāga 40 – 41,
46 – 47; general considerations 38 – 40;
for the Pratyabhijñā 41 – 42, 47 – 48,
57 – 59; in Śāntarakṣita and Kamalaśīla
50 – 52
svataḥprāmaṇya 80
Tantra 10, 12, 22
tattva (Śaivism) 105

Torella, Raffaele 8 – 9, 12 – 14, 16, 18,
21 – 23, 37, 43, 49, 112
transitive consciousness 91 – 92
universal (jāti) 17, 33, 53 – 55,
115 – 120, 128
universal subject 102, 105
Utpaladeva 1, 6 – 8, 12 – 18, 21, 26, 32 – 36,
41 – 48, 50, 52, 58 – 59, 63, 75, 78 – 79,
81 – 82, 84 – 85, 87, 89 – 90, 92, 94,
98 – 103, 106, 109 – 112
vaikharī vāc 23, 65 – 66
Vaiśeṣika 37, 116
Vasubandhu 19, 24
Vasugupta 11
Vergiani, Vincenzo 68
vimarśa 45 – 46, 76 – 78, 85, 87 – 89,
110 – 111
Williams, Paul 51 – 53, 60
Williamson, Timothy 80
Yogācāra (Buddhist tradition) 23, 50 – 52,
59, 96, 99, 100
zombie argument 89, 110

