Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

‘In this bold and brilliant book, Timalsina brings his formidable scholarship on Tantra to bear on questions regarding the nature and constitution of
complex images, the purposes and techniques of visualization, the emotional
dimension of abstract liturgical and cognitive processes, and the teleology of
bodily discipline. The re-conceptualisation of Tantra in order to open up its
potential to comparative philosophical understanding is provocative and
thought-provoking; even more striking is the wide-ranging, astonishingly
well-grounded and thoroughly original use of the ideas of cognitive linguistics
in that endeavour. Not only scholars of Tantra and Hindu Studies more
widely, but anyone interested in tackling fundamental philosophical questions
about cognition, emotion and body should read this book; there is much
beneﬁt to be had from it.’
Dr. Ram-Prasad Chakravarthi,
University of Lancaster, UK
‘Tantra, often misunderstood, ﬁnds illumination in this important book.
Dr. Timalsina carefully explains the role of metaphor and metonymy as well
as image and experience in this deeply aﬀective exploration of the texts and
practices of Tantra. Beautifully illustrated, this book gives access to material
that has hitherto been unknown, including new perspectives on visualization
through Yantra and Mandala as well as the eﬃcacy and function of Mantra.’
Professor Christopher Key Chapple,
Loyola Marymount University, USA.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

This page intentionally left blank

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Tantric Visual Culture

Indian culture relies greatly on visual expression, and this book uses both
classical Indian and contemporary Western philosophies and current studies
on cognitive sciences, and applies them to contextualize Tantric visual culture.
The work selects aspects of Tantric language and the practice of visualization, with the central premise to engage cognitive theories while studying
images. It utilizes the contemporary theories of metaphor and cognitive blend,
the theory of metonymy, and a holographic theory of epistemology with a
focus on concept formation and its application to the study of myths and
images. In addition, it applies the classical esthetic theory of rasa to unravel
the meaning of opaque images. This philosophical and cognitive analysis
allows materials from Indian culture to be understood in a new light, while
engaging contemporary theories of cognitive science and semantics. The book
demonstrates how the domains of meaning and philosophy can be addressed
within any culture without reducing their intrinsic cultural signiﬁcance.
By addressing these key aspects of Tantric traditions through this
approach, this book initiates a much-needed dialogue between Indian and
Western theories, while encouraging introspection with the Indic traditions
themselves. It will be of interest to those studying and researching Religion,
Philosophy and South Asian Culture.
Sthaneshwar Timalsina is Professor in the Department of Religious Studies at
San Diego State University, USA.

Routledge studies in Tantric Traditions

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Series Editor: Professor Gavin Flood, University of Stirling

The Routledge Studies in Tantric Traditions series is a major new monograph
series which has been established to publish scholarship on South, East,
and Southeast Asian tantric traditions. The series aims to promote the serious
study of both Hindu and Buddhist tantric traditions through the publication
of anthropological and textual studies and will not be limited to any one
method. Indeed, the series would hope to promote the view that anthropological studies can be informed by texts and textual studies informed by
anthropology. The series will therefore publish contemporary ethnographies
from diﬀerent regions, philological studies, philosophical studies, and historical studies of diﬀerent periods which contribute to the academic endeavor to
understand the role of tantric texts and their meaning in particular cultural
contexts. In this way, the series will hope to establish what the continuities
and divergencies are between Buddhist and Hindu tantric traditions, and
between diﬀerent regions. The series will be a major contribution to the ﬁelds
of Indology, Sinology, History of Religions, and Anthropology.
Identity, Ritual and State in Tibetan Buddhism
Martin A. Mills
The Khecarı-vidya- of Adina-tha
A critical edition and annotated translation of an early text of hat.hayoga
James Mallinson
An Introduction To Tantric Philosphy
The Parama-rthasa-ra of Abhinavagupta and its Commentary by Yogara-ja
Lyne Bansat-Boudon and Kamalesha Datta Tripathi
Tantric Mantras
Studies on mantrasastra
Andre Padoux
Tantric Visual Culture
A cognitive approach
Sthaneshwar Timalsina

Tantric Visual Culture
Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

A cognitive approach

Sthaneshwar Timalsina

Routledge

Routledge

Routledge

Routledge
Routledge

First published 2015
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

and by Routledge
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2015 Sthaneshwar Timalsina
The right of Sthaneshwar Timalsina to be identiﬁed as author of this work
has been asserted by him in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or
utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now
known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in
any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing
from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or
registered trademarks, and are used only for identiﬁcation and explanation
without intent to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar, 1965- author.
Tantric visual culture : a cognitive approach / Sthaneshwar Timalsina.
pages cm. -- (Routledge studies in tantric traditions)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. Tantrism. 2. Philosophy, Indic. 3. Visualization. I. Title.
BL1283.84.T56 2015
294.5’514--dc23
2014030805
ISBN: 978-1-138-81284-0 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-315-74852-8 (ebk)
Typeset in Times New Roman
by Taylor & Francis Books

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Contents

List of illustrations
Acknowledgments
Abbreviations

ix
x
xi

Introduction
Overview

1
5

SECTION 1

Image in the context of Tantric practice

11

1

13

Mnemonics, image compression, and Tantric visualization
Enlivening the Śrı- Cakra 17
Cognitive engineering: mnemonic domains of
visualization 22

SECTION 2

Image, metonymy, and metaphors

29

2

Metonymic structure of Tantric images
Metonymic framework 32
Varieties of Tantric language 35
Metonymy, memory, and visualization 41

31

3

Metaphor, embodiment, and Tantric images
Deﬁning the categories 51
Metaphor, embodiment, and culture 51
Metaphor and cultural hermeneutics 53
Ideology, metaphor, and Tantric visualization
Body, metaphor, and visualization 67
Conclusion 72

51

57

viii

Contents

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

SECTION 3

Image compression and decompression

77

4

Blended images in Tantric visualization
Cognitive framework 79
Yoginı-s and their sequence 85
The image of Kubjika- 87
The image of Siddhalaks.mı- 89
Analysis and conclusion 95

79

5

Holographic limbs and metaphoric bodies in Hindu myths
Introduction 102
Eyes, perception, and hologram 105
The power of vision 109
The organs of speech 110
.
Linga and Yoni 113
Hair: the corporeal boundary 115
Conclusion 117

102

SECTION 4

Visualization and emotions

121

6

Invoking emotions: reading Tantric images in light of Rasa theory
The argument 123
The framework of rasa 126
The Man.d.ala of emotions 130
The divine play of emotions 132

123

7

Conclusions

143

Bibliography
Index I: Deity Names and Technical Terms
Index II: Scholars Cited

150
170
174

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

List of illustrations

Figures
1.1
1.2
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
3.1
4.1
4.2
5.1
5.2
5.3
6.1
6.2
6.3

Śrı- Cakra
TripuraBhairava
Ka-lıŚrı- Cakra with letters
Bhagavadgı-ta- as a deity
Guhyaka-lıKubjikaSiddhalaks.mıBhairava
Ka-lı.
Śivalinga
Durga Mahis.a-suramardinıCa-mun.d.aChinnamasta-

18
19
36
45
46
46
59
89
92
107
112
113
136
136
138

Tables
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4

Yoginı-s of the Six Cakras
Face deities of KubjikaVisualizations of Siddhalaks.mıEight Laks.mı-s of the Siddhalaks.mı- family

86
88
90
91

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Acknowledgments

This work engages the varied topics of Tantric visualization, Indian philosophies in general, and Tantric philosophy in particular, Indian esthetic theories,
contemporary Western philosophy, cognitive science, and cognitive linguistics.
In a departure from existing mainstream discourse, this study centers around
images. I am thankful to Dr. Glen Alexander Hayes for the initial encouragement to read Tantric materials through the lens of cognitive science. This
work is a consequence of a prolonged engagement with scholars working both
in the ﬁeld of religious studies and cognitive science.
Many teachers in Nepal and India have given a tremendous amount of
time and attention in explaining nuances of Tantric practice and philosophy,
and I express my deepest gratitude to them. The late Prem Chetan Brahmacari, Dr. Vidyanath Upadhyaya, the late Samkara Chaitanya Bharati, Dr.
Ramji Malaviya, and the late Vrajavallabha Dviveda, are some of the teachers who have shaped my knowledge of Tantra. My coming to the West, and
the education in the Western world has equally enriched my understanding,
and this work is a synthesis of both these systems of training. I am sincerely
thankful to Drs. David Peter Lawrence, Loriliai Biernacki, David Gordon
White, Jeﬀrey Ruﬀ, Sushil Mittal, Purushottama Bilimoria, Gerald J. Larson,
Rebecca Moore, and Thomas Oberlies for their kind suggestions, encouragement, and companionship. Many thanks also go to Mr. Jason Schwartz for
reading several chapters of the manuscript. Finally, I express my sincere gratitude to Mrs. Mary Hicks for reading the earlier version of the manuscript,
and to Ms. Beth Fountain, for the preparation of images for publication.
I am equally grateful to my family, Gayatri Devi, Nitya, and Ishan.

Copyright acknowledgments
An earlier version of Chapter 5 appeared in the following journal:
“Holographic Bodies and Metaphoric Limbs in Hindu Myths,” Zeitschrift
für Indologie und Südasienstudien 2, 167–86. 2012.
The Siddhalaksmı- image on page 92 has been reproduced courtesy of
Serindia Publications, London, from the book, Kathmandu Valley Painting
The Jucker Collection. Written by Hugo E. Kreijger and published in 1999.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Abbreviations

BAS
BAU
CGC
CS
DAL
DM
NŚ
NS.A
PP
RG
SD
SL
ŚVT
YH

Bhairava-nukaran.astava
Br.hada-ran.yakopanis.ad
CidgaganacandrikaCakrasam
. vara
Dhvanya-loka-Locana
Devı-ma-ha-tmya
Na-t.yaśa-stra
Nitya-s.od.aśika-rn.ava
Phenomenology of Perception
.
Rasaganga-dhara
Sa-hityadarpan.a
SaundaryalaharıŚrı-vidya-rn.avatantra
Yoginı-hr.daya

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

This page intentionally left blank

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Introduction

This work combines Tantric studies with cutting-edge research on cognitive
science. While on one hand it reﬂects my more than thirty-year engagement
with Tantric practitioners in North India and Nepal coupled with an ardent desire
to comprehend this complex and perplexing system, on the other, it expresses
my intention to examine select visualization practices through a cognitive
approach. As a faithful student of philology, I have in the past endeavored to
understand texts within their own historical and cultural frameworks. In this
book, I am attempting to transcend the traditional modes of reading by applying
new methods to interpret the practice. A cross-pollination of disciplines without boundaries, I am convinced, has the potential to solve the problems in
one discipline by utilizing a new set of tools developed in the other. To meet
these expectations, this work brings together four diﬀerent outlooks:
(i) emic self-understanding;
(ii) contemporary historiography;
(iii) theories of contemporary cognitive science, particularly metaphor and
conceptual blending, and;
(iv) Indian classical esthetics.
While this poses a daunting challenge of introducing categories from diﬀerent
disciplines and utilizing them to make a coherent narrative, the objective is to
show an alternative to the contemporary approaches to cultural studies, and
the work here is therefore preliminary.
Originating in South Asia in approximately the ﬁfth century CE, Tantric
texts constitute a body of literature that teaches certain ritual activities and
disciplines to initiated practitioners. These texts oﬀer both speciﬁc guidelines
for meditative practices as well as particular worldviews and philosophies that
aim to transform the practitioner’s outlook and response to the world. In
general, each Tantric text addresses a primary deity, detailing how to invoke
the deity through the use of sacred syllables (mantra) and visualization practices
that incorporate abstract geometric images (man.d.ala). The results of performing
such actions, according to practitioners, include both the achievement of
magical powers or ‘perfections’ (siddhis) as well as self-realization.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

2

Introduction

Tantra is a generic term that involves various esoteric practices of the
Hindus, Buddhists, and Jains. Frequently, we ﬁnd that some of these practices
cross religious boundaries, so that even the deities, the rituals oriented
towards those deities, and the results anticipated from such practices appear
identical. Nevertheless, what distinguishes these disciplines is the overarching
philosophical framework within which these seemingly identical practices are
embedded. It is due to the internal philosophical diversity of this discourse,
the complexity of its rituals, and inaccessibility of contemplative practices,
that a unitary understanding of Tantra has eluded, and continues to elude,
Western scholars.1 In these pages, my objective is not to enter this debate.
Instead, I will engage only the salient features of Tantric language and images
with an intent to initiate a dialogue between various contemporary cognitive
theories and Tantric literature. In order to orient the readers, this work oﬀers
a brief account of Tantric discourse and as well as selected contemporary
cognitive approaches.
Some of the most salient features of Tantric discourse include the concept
that the world is directly linked with the human body and that both are
composed of the same cosmic energy. If this connection is recognized, so
the texts claim, the human body and mind can interact with and aﬀect the course
of cosmic events. Many Śaiva and Śa-kta Tantras embody a monistic worldview wherein the central deity emanates in the form of the world. Thus, such
traditions reject the oppositional dualism between matter and consciousness
or body and self. Tantras are generally understood to be world-aﬃrming: the
bliss and consciousness that occur in cognitive and somatic experiences are in
fact quintessential to Tantric transformation. These Tantric practices not only
alter the subject’s perception of reality, but they are also claimed to be eﬀective
in inducing or altering certain somatic states.2
This is where the scientiﬁc approach can contribute to our exploration. If
these practices somehow grant a broader inﬂuence of the mind over the body
or transform the subject’s orientation towards himself and the world, not only
should these eﬀects be measurable and able to be analyzed, but this exploration should itself oﬀer insights potentially of considerable signiﬁcance to the
study of a relationship between the mind and the body. Since the Tantric
approach is not only cognitive but also involves emotions as an integral
component of ritual performance and aims to teach the practitioner to cultivate speciﬁc emotions, this study also addresses the eﬀects of Tantric practices
on a subject’s emotional response.
Foremost among Tantric practices is visualization or the formation of a
mental image. Tantric rituals begin with the aspirant mentally ‘seeing’ various
syllables and mantras in his own body. The practitioner imagines the syllables
transforming into the image of the deity, then envisions the body of the deity
either within the various centers of his body or in his mental frame of
awareness. In some cases, he also visualizes speciﬁc geometric designs that
correlate with the divine body. In these rituals of visualization, the body of the
deity is viewed or imagined at the center of a man.d.ala or in the heart of the

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Introduction

3

aspirant, with her associate deities being visualized in the surrounding area.
As the sequence of visualization proceeds, the aspirant mentally enlivens the
image or assumes it to be alive and performs ritual oﬀerings. The goal of this
complex practice is to experience the oneness of the aspirant, deity, and all that
exists. In his mental space, the practitioner perceives the world as if it is emanating from the deity and then being reabsorbed within her.3 What is explicit
in the visualization process is an attenuated focus on the mind in creating
reality, as the encounter with the deity occurring in the course of visualization
is considered as real. This process of creating and manipulating mental
images requires a heightened degree of cognitive attention.
This monograph addresses select aspects of Tantric language and the practice of visualization, and the central premise is to engage cognitive theories
while studying images. In the course of this exploration, the focus on ‘Tantric
language’ will also incorporate a detailed analysis of images, because in the
Tantric discourse, images are central and conveying a greater understanding than
can be accessed through words. Thus, what unfolds in the coming chapters is
a dialogue between Tantric practices and a selection of contemporary cognitive approaches to language and images. Existing scholarship on Tantric
traditions has paid little attention to the philosophical aspect of its visual
culture, the ways in which images are intended to encode speciﬁc meanings.
Yet, on the ground, visual images dominate Tantric culture, and visualization
is central to Tantric practice.
Contemporary trends of scholarship in this area, however, primarily involve
archaeological, text-historical, and sociological studies. An historical approach
provides the social frame of reference and has helped contextualize meaning,
albeit with limitations. A mere socio-cultural reading, however, cannot plumb
the depths of Tantric literature, both visual and textual. In particular, when
considering the visual culture, existing studies privilege archaeology and history, sidelining the hermeneutic and philosophical domains. Even the application of South Asian classical esthetic theories in the service of reading the
visual culture has been relegated to the sidelines of Indological discourse. This
work, therefore, is an attempt to move away from the dominant scholarly
approach to reading Tantric culture.
In our times, cognitive science has made signiﬁcant advancement in
understanding human nature. By opening a dialogue between the discipline of
Tantric studies and the disciplines of cognitive studies, linguistics, and consciousness studies, this research also aims to advance a rational scientiﬁc
approach to the study of religions. Typically, however, the problem with such
an approach is that it has strong tendencies towards an extreme materialistic
reductionism that is both philosophically impoverished and dismissive of the
self-understandings of the people and cultures it is studying. In contrast, in
engaging a cognitive approach, my aim is not to enter hard reductionism, but
to work in the areas where the exchange between two disciplines can be mutually
productive. The present work thus aims to ﬁll these lacunae by engaging
classical Indian and contemporary Western philosophies, and current studies

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

4

Introduction

on cognitive sciences and its application in reading visual culture. This
philosophical and cognitive analysis allows materials from Indian culture to be
read in a new light, while at the same time engaging contemporary theories of
cognitive science and semantics. This monograph thus attempts to demonstrate
how rituals, images, and the language used to encode those rituals can be
addressed without diminishing their intrinsic cultural signiﬁcance.
A fusion of approaches, the main objective of this reading, does not consider cognitive scientiﬁc as ‘Western’ and classical Indian philosophy and
esthetics as mere ‘emic’ perspectives. This work also deviates from existing
trends by giving intrinsic cultural hermeneutics an equal status for deciphering meaning. My understanding is that a scientiﬁc outlook is universal in
nature, grounded on truths that cannot be reduced to merely an academic or
cultural perspective and placed in the service of the existing hierarchy of
power. Rather than leading to a perplexity of incompatible perspectives, this
inclusive application of approaches thus seeks to advance our understanding
of culture and human nature.

Notes
1 For the history of Tantrism, see Goudriaan and Gupta 1981. For the concept of
mantra, see Alper 1991; and Timalsina 2005 and 2010a. For an introduction to
Tantra, see White 2000, 2001a, 2001b: 3–38; and Brooks 2001: 347–60. For an
introduction to Hindu images, see Gopinath Rao 1968.
2 White 1993, Timalsina 2008, and Flood 2005.
3 For discussions on mental space, see Fauconnier 1985; Lakoﬀ 1990; Hart 2007;
and Fauconnier and Turner 1998: 133–87.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Overview

While deciphering the meaning of the obscure Tantric language and images, it
is essential to engage the intrinsic cultural hermeneutics, and this is because
classical theories and practices have co-evolved, and an awareness of this
reciprocal inﬂuence assists us in making an informed analysis. Contemporary
scientiﬁc approaches are equally relevant because when addressing metaphor,
metonymy, concept formation, or emotions, these provide insight into the
preexisting theories from classical India that have given rise to these complex
images. Tantras have been elusive as objects of study, not just because their
practices are secretive, but also because the texts themselves defy linear reading. For instance, when the texts describe a mantra, they use select terms to
refer to each syllable, requiring decipherment. A linguistic approach, in my
understanding, brings to light the intricate issues of sign and reference
embedded in Tantric language and at the same time attempts to uncover
the coherent hermeneutical systems that make it possible to read these
otherwise opaque texts. Over the course of this work, theories of metaphor
and cognitive blend, metonymy, a holographic theory of epistemology with a
focus on concept formation and its application to the study of myths and
images, and the esthetic theory of rasa are examined so that we may read
both texts and images in a new light.
The ﬁrst chapter is entitled, “Mnemonics, Image Compression, and Tantric
Visualization.” Contemporary scholarship on Tantric studies has paid very
little attention to the relationship between cognitive theory and deity images
and man.d.alas. The objects under consideration are diﬀerent from secular
mnemonic images. We can, however, analyze their application in Tantric
visualization as mnemonic tools without reducing their religious context.
Succinctly, a deity image reminds the practitioner of the entire Tantric system
or the particular liturgy associated with the deity. These images are used to
bring to mind a speciﬁc cosmology and to evoke distinct emotions that
correspond to particular man.d.alas and mantras. Furthermore, images are
linked to each other, and one image can engender the memory of concepts
linked to the entire system. It is thus not possible to engage a fruitful conversation on the cognitive domain of Tantric images without analyzing their
mnemonic aspects.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

6

Overview

Drawing upon the cognitive metaphor theories of Turner, Lakoﬀ, and
Johnson, the second chapter, “Image and Metonymy,” addresses the ways
metonymic structures help us unravel the meaning of Tantric images. Contemporary studies in cognitive linguistics have established that metonymy is
not a mere extension of metaphoric language and is central to the evolution
of human consciousness. This means that we cannot understand the scope of
linguistic expression by treating metaphors and metonymy as simply literary
tropes. In plain language, both metaphor and metonymy relate to non-literal
meaning. While we typically assume that there is a direct or a proper language
adequate to describe empirical reality with exacting precision, in fact, many
of our literal expressions actually rest on metaphor and metonymy. Terms
such as ‘black hole’ or ‘god-particle’ from popular science exemplify this. In
general, metaphor is a descriptive word or phrase used to describe something
where the entity could have been described otherwise by direct language.
Thus, for example, Sanskrit literature habitually refers to a heroic ﬁgure as
.
narapungava, a bull among men, as opposed to simply saying that such a
ﬁgure is a really great guy. This example also demonstrates how metaphors
are culturally grounded. In metonymy, words denoting something are
replaced with the words that denote one aspect or one property of that entity,
thus describing something by using language associated with a part of what is
being described. For instance, eyes portray vision, a wheel demonstrates
motion, and the crown signiﬁes a monarch. By pointing out how the relation
of one object to another in an image can be metonymically linked, this
study oﬀers fresh insights into complex and arcane Tantric images, replete
with multiple hands and heads. In doing so, this chapter also exploits
the learning of classical Sanskrit exegetes and their ways of theorizing about
complex images. When viewed within this background, an historically sensitive reading of images provides us with deeper insight into the philosophical
developments in classical India that paralleled the advance of the esthetic
culture of image-making.
Building on our earlier explorations, the third chapter, entitled “Metaphor,
Embodiment, and Tantric Images,” oﬀers an attempt to initiate a dialogue
between the classical Indian theory of laks.an.a- or secondary derivation
where meaning is expressed through suggestion, and the contemporary cognitive
metaphor theory of Turner, Lakoﬀ, and Johnson.
The above two chapters (Chapters 2 and 3) thus deal with articulating what
has been encoded in Tantric literature, ritual, and visualization. These chapters,
however, do not engage with the process of the encoding itself in order to
make sense of the esoteric Tantric language and its cryptology. The subsequent
section aims to meet this need.
The next two chapters in this book address the ways concepts can be analyzed
by ﬁrst engaging the cognitive theory of conceptual blend and then exploring
how a holographic approach to epistemology and cosmology can explain
Tantric visualization. In Tantras, bodies are ‘meaningful,’ not only in the
sense of merely being embodied, but also because of the way the body has

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Overview

7

been deciphered as a text. Whether an aspirant is viewing his own body in a
particular way or gazing upon the divine body, visualization is an encounter
of an embodied subject with other bodies, and a process where meaning is
both encoded and deciphered. Tantric visualization of the body involves
recognizing reality as embodied, understanding the cosmic correlation with the
human body, and having both the cognitive and emotional domains transformed to accommodate this experience. Therefore, the deciphering of Tantric
meanings layered upon the human body parallels the recognition of the oneness
of the embodied and transcendent selves.
Following the above premise, the next chapter, “Blended Images in
Tantric Visualization,” utilizes the theory of conceptual blend advanced by
Fauconnier and Turner to read often-graphic Tantric images. Rather than
considering the integration of diﬀerent pictures in the emergent structure
as coincidental, Tantric practitioners utilize this cognitive faculty by making a
conscious eﬀort to blend diﬀerent images in a manner that gives rise to
considerable iconographic and conceptual complexities. As propounded by
Fauconnier and Turner, the development of visual culture parallels the cognitive evolutionary trajectory. This application of a cognitive mechanism
in the process of visualization oﬀers a clue as to why Tantric practitioners
create imagery with multiple heads and hands, with deities riding on top of
various other deities. Fauconnier and Turner convincingly argue that new
conceptual constructs emerge by blending pre-existing structures, and various
inputs are borrowed from diﬀerent sources in this process. The application of
this theory in reading Tantric images sheds light on otherwise opaque forms.
I also point out that the practitioners were somewhat familiar with this
tendency of blending, as the images suggest a conscious integration of diﬀerent
aspects from diﬀerent deities in the process of giving rise to new forms.
This chapter also aims to contextualize the study of consciousness in order to
address various philosophical issues, exploring examples from within Tantric
culture.
The ﬁfth chapter, “Holographic Limbs and Metaphoric Bodies in Hindu
Myths,” explores the concept of hologram in light of the arguments of David
Bohm and Karl Pribram. In many temples, deities are displayed as a torso
without the head, or just a head without the body. In some shrines, only the
eyes represent the deity. A wide range of Hindu myths demonstrate that the
body parts of deities or demons alike reconﬁgure as a new body. These myths
also suggest an integration of multiple bodies into a single form. The argument of this chapter is that what underlies these myths is the overarching
concept, shared throughout the Indian culture, that the body mirrors the
cosmos and that ‘one’ and ‘many’ are just two modes of the same reality.
Analyzing images thus returns us to the epistemological issue of how consciousness grasps and constitutes reality. Holographic models make sense of
the process whereby parts are viewed as complete, representing the entire body.
This analysis of the mythical bodies, I argue, complements our understanding
of Tantric epistemology.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

8

Overview

Additionally, viewing cosmology as holographic helps answer some of the
unresolved issues in anthropology as to why Hindu and Buddhist practitioners
depict a deity by only representing eyes or a head, or worship particular
limbs such as the feet, genitals, or even an ear. This chapter on holographic
limbs engages the Tantric non-dual theory of concept formation in light of
holographic epistemology and relates them to the analysis of images. The two
chapters in this section (Chapters 4 and 5) thus engage emic understandings
of concept formation and their application in Tantric practices.
The ﬁnal stage in understanding Tantric language, particularly the language
of images, is recognizing the way emotions are displayed in images and how
emotion has been utilized within this tradition. Tantric philosophers have
drawn extensively upon the esthetic theory of rasa that oﬀers a uniquely
South Asian cognitive and esthetic model for addressing emotion. By introducing
rasa into this discussion, my aim is ﬁrst to initiate an intra-school dialogue
within the Indic traditions themselves and point towards the need for a
broader theory to address emotions. While this approach is challenging, as
there is not just one theory of rasa and not all arguments in the discourse of
rasa are applicable to studying emotions, it is nonetheless rewarding. Engaging
rasa theory to reading emotions not only helps initiate an interdisciplinary
dialogue, it also facilitates reading visualization in light of the Indian theory
of emotion and analyzing the culturally constructed aspects of emotion. This
approach helps us escape the dualism of the mind and the body prevalent in
the Cartesian school of thought, and address the intricate mind body relation
in light of the Tantric philosophy of emotion. In other words, it allows us to
understand consciousness from an embodied and phenomenal perspective, as
traditionally advanced by rasa theory.
Keeping these issues in mind, the next section (Chapter 6) in this monograph,
“Invoking Emotions: Reading Tantric Images in Light of Rasa Theory,”
explores the ways the classical esthetic theory of rasa assists in unraveling the
meaning of Tantric images. The argument in this chapter is that the esthetic
theory of rasa allows the viewer to comprehend these otherwise opaque
images in a proper light. This marriage of two systems is not new, as multiple
Tantric philosophers have written about esthetics. Reading the Tantric visual
culture through the perspective of rasa also supports us in contextualizing the
prevalence of representations that invoke negative emotions such as horror,
disgust, or violence. Furthermore, it helps us address cultural experience by
utilizing an emic framework. In this way, the text addresses six key aspects of
Tantric traditions and explores how to meaningfully engage these topics. I
conclude the text with some observations based on the analysis in the earlier
chapters, and suggestions for future studies.
Contemporary Tantric studies needs to evolve from an exaggerated focus
on hedonistic practices on one hand and the tendency of esotericization on
the other. Although Tantric texts are very technical and any discourse on
images or mantras can be extremely complicated for non-Indologists, the
focus here is on a dialogue among disciplines, and the text has therefore

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Overview

9

refrained from making use of technical jargon as much as possible. These
applications allow us to rethink Tantra, particularly Tantric images, and read
their cognitive, psychological, philosophical, and linguistic domains.
The tension between a phenomenology of the sacred (manifestation) and
the hermeneutics of religious language and discourse (proclamation), as outlined
by Paul Ricoeur,1 is worth mentioning in these introductory pages. By manifestation, Ricoeur means our religious experience is what develops in the
process of making bonds between ourselves and the natural world. He means
by proclamation the interpretation of such experiences in order to communicate
them. Ricoeur argues that due to the way we experience the sacred as awesome, powerful, and overwhelming, it is ineﬀable. He then mentions that
although we cannot describe the numinous as such, we can describe how it
manifests itself. Ricoeur also categorizes rituals within the trait of manifestation
of the sacred, acknowledging that the importance of ritual is found in
experience itself and not in interpretation. He then addresses the role of
symbols and metaphors for understanding both the place of humankind in
the cosmos and God’s presence in nature. The Tantric language of images and
the practice of visualization ﬁt very well in the parameters of manifestation
and proclamation that Ricoeur identiﬁes, because a closer look into the
system of images makes it clear that these images are a product of experience,
and their goal is to transform experience and stimulate distinctive responses of
subjects in their engagement with the natural world and the sacred. These
images form a distinct language, following the similar parameters of our natural
language. However, I do not consider that these images are simply parts of
ritual that embody experience. On the contrary, images capture the experience,
the subject’s aim to transform his own understanding of his body, as well as
his experience of the natural world. Equally important, it also functions as a
language to communicate experience that can be shared among initiates who
aspire to cultivating the same experience. Reading images both as a distilled
form of experience containing the tools for cultivating experience on the one
hand and as a language to communicate experience on the other helps us
identify the ways experience has been institutionalized and shared across
times in diﬀerent cultures.

Note
1 Ricoeur 1978: 13–35.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

This page intentionally left blank

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Section 1

Image in the context of
Tantric practice

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

This page intentionally left blank

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

1

Mnemonics, image compression, and
Tantric visualization

Mnemonics is the study of the systems linked with improving and assisting
memory. While mnemonic devices have historically been of interest for people
wanting to expand their capacity for recalling speciﬁc content, in recent years
this has become a topic of interest for those addressing human cognition and
memory in more general terms. As we shall see, in Indian Tantric culture,
deity images and the geometric designs called man.d.alas are used in a way that
is comparable to mnemonic devices. While these images bear considerable
religious and devotional signiﬁcance, in the context of visualization practices
they are utilized to evoke complex systems of signiﬁcation, sometimes
encompassing entire Tantric systems. The opacity of deity images in the
Hindu culture has perplexed many people, and the extant studies have done
very little to unravel the complexity of the visual culture. As will soon
be made apparent, visual images play a central role in contemplative practice
and are used to enhance attention and retain memory. Furthermore, such
images are intertwined with imagination and the creative aspect of human
cognition.1
Recent studies have established that visual images are powerful devices for
enhancing memory.2 The interaction of images with each other eﬀectively
consolidates the retention of meaning.3 Bizarre images are found to remain in
memory for a longer time than, for example, an esthetically appealing landscape.4
Such insights, along with various related studies on human cognition and
memory, have inspired me to explore the cognitive domain of Tantric visualization. This does not mean that contemplative practices and their philosophies provide only the raw materials for a newly emerging discipline. For
scholars in religious studies, engaging cognitive aspects of images shifts our
attention from the dominant historical and sociological perspectives and helps
us describe the aspects that have remained misunderstood. In turn, through a
plethora of case studies, ethnographic and textual materials validate the research
of cognitive scientists. Moreover, various arguments from indigenous philosophies compel a reevaluation of our understandings regarding human
cognitive behavior.
Before we engage with complex issues on Tantric rituals and their relevance to
contemporary studies in the area of cognitive science, it is vital that we

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

14

Mnemonics and Tantric visualization

demonstrate that Tantric visualization ﬁts the criteria of mnemonic techniques. For instance, entities to be recollected in these practices are spatialized, and
categories are vertically or horizontally organized. The categories to be
remembered are localized in the body through the ritual of ‘installation’
(nya-sa). Diﬀerent limbs in the body thus relate to Sanskrit phonemes, various
mantras, the underlying philosophical principles (tattvas), and the cosmic
planes (bhuvanas). A contemporary ﬁnding suggests that spatialization is
twice as eﬀective in recollecting the items.5 Accordingly, retrieval of memory
is easier if its organization follows a systematized framework. In this process,
1) the items to be remembered are conceptualized in meaningful units,
2) arranged in a hierarchy, and 3) designated by the ﬁrst letters of each article
to create an acronym. All these techniques are used in Tantric visualization.
Besides instructing the subject to complete a series of visual projections,
liturgies and philosophical texts also prescribe the cultivation of speciﬁc
emotions or their absence. Experiments suggest that a balanced state of mind
achieved through various mindfulness practices also leads to more eﬀective
recollection.6
What is common to all Tantric visualization practices is repeating mantras
while actively imagining the divine bodies or geometric designs called man.d.alas.
In order to create experiences that are felt to be real, Tantric practice relies on
bringing to mind both image and speech. Within the realm of mental representation, Allan Paivio introduced a dual-coding theory where two alternative
verbal and non-verbal methods represent events.7 Our concepts, following this
theory, can be held both in images and words. The dual-coding theory
demonstrates that lasting memory can be created by the use of both image
and words. While images can evoke information simultaneously, words follow
one after another in recall. Accordingly, words are used also to describe
mental images. Verbal memory rests on a diﬀerent system than the analogous
codes utilized in images that allow the mind to preserve in memory an almost
identical imprint of what has been experienced. Although dual-coding theory
has some limitations,8 the central claim that memory can be enhanced by use
of both image and word remains unchallenged. The Tantric visualization that
primarily rests on utilizing both words and images can, in this sense, be seen
in light of Paivio’s thesis. In the context of visualization, when images are recalled,
the texts or mantras are actively attained, and when texts are played simply
out of memory, images are recalled. What is unique to this model is the
activation of diﬀerent cognitive processes at the same time.
Speech is the primary device of visualization in Tantras. Rather than
simply recalling words, visualization practice uses mantras as a template for
contemplating various other categories. Further imprinting the process of
recollection, mantras are not just simply ‘heard,’ remembered, or brought
forth through recall, but rather, they are mentally situated in diﬀerent parts of
the body and ‘seen’ as images. Speech and image merge in a single cognitive
domain, as the speech becomes very subtle at the stage of paśyantı-.9 This level
of speech, following grammarians and Tantric philosophers, merges speech

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Mnemonics and Tantric visualization

15

and vision, where words are ‘seen’ in the screen of mind. Meditations upon
speech meticulously cultivate subtle states where the ‘sound’ aspect of words
collapses and are merely observed. In this state, language-like description
and picture-like codes are merged and perceptual and auditory modalities
become one.
Thanks to the cognitive scientists, various aspects of mental mechanisms
are known today that were not available even a few decades ago. This facilitates exploration of the internal domain of some of these meditative practices,
particularly the relationship of image to speech, in this case mantra. An
understanding of the techniques adopted by Tantric practitioners to explore
the deeper layers of mind where language and image converge contributes
valuable insight into the current controversy over whether mental images
resemble perception that uses analogous (visual) code, or images that use
propositional (verbal) code. Another interesting parallel can be found
between the animation of images in Tantric practice and the mental rotation
of images identiﬁed by the cognitive scientists. Johnson (1990) outlines the
stages of mental rotation, where the subjects ﬁrst create a mental image of an
object, rotate the object mentally until a comparison is possible, then compare
and contrast and make a decision.10 While these cognitive mechanisms are at
play in every decision-making act, visualization creates a scenario where
subjects learn to observe their own mental state while undergoing these
processes.
Thus, Tantric images resemble cognitive maps that integrate information
acquired through various perceptual modes. The process whereby the practitioner
generates deity images and performs rituals by means of visualization
parallels the mechanisms involved in spatial cognition, including the acquisition, organization, utilization, and revision of our awareness about spatial
environments. These processes of spatial cognition are integral to everyday
decision-making and common to cognitive behavior. Essentially, what Tantric
traditions do is they ritualize these common cognitive aspects and embed
them in a precise and coherent system of praxis. Tantric practice involves
imagination, manipulation of images, integration of diﬀerent inputs in a
single cognitive domain, activation of a particular emotion that corresponds
to the cultivation of a speciﬁc image called to mind, retention of the projected
images for particular span of time, and integration of complex cosmologies
and philosophies during the course of visualization. Besides prescribing
rituals, Tantric practitioners often provide their own commentary upon these
highly systematized processes, thereby oﬀering sophisticated meta-reﬂections
on under-examined aspects of ordinary human cognition only recently identiﬁed by cognitive scientists. These reﬂections help us understand the parameters in which such rituals were carried out. In turn, the manuals of
visualization and practitioner’s reﬂections upon their own practice oﬀer us
ﬁrst-hand information on altered states of consciousness, and provide insight
into deeper phenomenal states that are hard to observe objectively in the
laboratory.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

16

Mnemonics and Tantric visualization

Many of the techniques applied in Tantric visualization are also utilized in
developing mnemonic devices. The simultaneous availability of an image and
its parts and the sequential act of speech allow Tantric practitioners to
integrate speech in visual forms. Man.d.alas and sometimes even the deity images
come with various mantras inscribed upon them. In the process of visualization,
all of the essential mantras of a system are frequently viewed within the body
of the practitioner, and when the subject undergoes meditation, he can
experience the simultaneous presence of all mantras as parts of the body.
While man.d.alas can be suddenly ‘given’ in a ﬂash of awareness and mantras
are sequentially recited, both merge in the practice of visualization. Likewise,
the Tantric ritual of dha-ran.a- or retaining images from the external input, and
a creative drawing of the phonemes, diagrams, or images parallel the application of eidetic images that are found to last in the mind for a longer time, even
after the removal of the external source.11 Due to cognitive de-diﬀerentiation
or the infusion of processes that ordinarily function in isolation, eidetic imagery is
compared to synesthesia. The analogy between eidetic images, dualprocessing, and the concept of paśyantı- is crucial for a cognitive analysis of
Tantric visualization. This is where language and image constitute an integral
dimension of cognition.
Additionally, Tantric manuals prescribe the visualization of sequentially
complex imagery. Even in regards to a single deity, for instance the goddess
Tripura- from the tradition of Śrı-vidya-, over the course of a sequence of
visualizations, the image invoked successively progresses from a simple image
of the goddess with two arms, to a goddess with four, sixteen, or a hundred
and eight arms. As the visualization progresses, the goddess is seen with a
single head or up to sixteen and the number of weapons the deity carries also
increases. At the same time, the seat upon which the deity is enthroned
also becomes increasingly intricate and complex. In essence, the ﬁeld of
attention expands as the meditation progresses. Crucial to this progression
is an integration of diﬀerent inputs that gives rise to a single image of the
deity. This process of visualization evokes Fauconnier’s theory of conceptual
blending. The graphically visual culture of Tantra demonstrates ﬁndings
made in the scientiﬁc ﬁeld of cognitive study on introspection, image
formation, concepts, retention of imagery, and the mechanisms at play when
organizing imagery for long-term memory. The select examples outlined
above illustrate that hitherto unexplained aspects of Tantric rituals and
philosophies can be better understood, if ﬁndings from the cognitive domain
are engaged.
Linguistic and contemplative philosophies provide the backdrop for much
of Tantric practice. Indic philosophers such as Bhartr.hari and Abhinavagupta, the latter being one of the greatest theorists of Tantric practice, oﬀer
analysis that not only helps to explain the presuppositions of Tantric rituals,
but also provides valuable insight into the nature of the human mind. This
opens up a greater exchange and dialogue between contemporary cognitive
theories and Tantric philosophies and practices.

Mnemonics and Tantric visualization

17

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Enlivening the Śrı- Cakra12
This section details the meditative practice within the pantheon of Tripura-.
While there are particular aspects speciﬁc to every deity, they all follow the
same framework. For this reason, addressing one visualization in detail will
provide us with a template for further observation and analysis. As we shall see,
salient features in this visualization are shared with the more familiar meditation
practices of Patañjalian Yoga. Thus after brieﬂy addressing the commonalities
shared by these traditions, I will then distinguish the salient features of Tantric
visualization.
Patañjali identiﬁes the ﬁxation of mind in a particular locale as ‘concentration’
(dha-ran.a-), and ‘meditation’ (dhya-na) as the continuation of a single ﬂow of
consciousness that is focused on a single object.13 Tantras additionally introduce
new terms such as ‘visualization’ (bha-vana-), ‘recollection’ (anusmaran.a),
‘memory’ (smaran.a), and ‘imagination’ (kalpana-). Most manuals outline
the
pﬃ
visualization pofﬃ the deity with the imperative
terms
derived
from
dhyai
for
pﬃ
meditation, smr. for recollection, kr.p for imagination, and other similar
roots. Although the act of meditation is the same, Patañjalian and Tantric
processes diﬀer in terms of the utilization of images. In particular, rather than
directing the practitioner to ﬁx his attention on a single object, Tantras oﬀer a
sequence of objects upon which he is to meditate. Similarly, in reciting mantras
in Tantric traditions, there is not a focus on a single mantra or a single concept, but rather on its repetition, creating a chain of similar concepts in the
awareness of the practitioner.14 Tantric visualization primarily relies on
creating and retaining successive similar concepts. This practice requires
imagination, as it prescribes the integration of diﬀerent inputs, animation of
objects by considering the image as a living breathing entity, and engagement
by the practitioner with the object of meditation. Instead of identifying
Tantric visualization with Patañjalian dhya-na, I would therefore relate it to
anusmr.ti. This recollective mode of consciousness plays a central role in yogic
systems that existed earlier than Patañjali, as it is with his Yogasu-tra that
anusmaran.a is eliminated from the list of meditational practices.15 Essential to
Tantric visualization are the singular aspects of recollecting the deity image or
her man.d.ala, mentally drawing the image or man.d.ala, creating a dialogue
with the deity image by considering her to be alive and giving various mental
oﬀerings, evoking positive emotions of devotion or love (as well as other
emotions such as arousal in a controlled environment), and remembering the
correlation between speciﬁc aspects of mantra or image with its corresponding
philosophy and cosmology. Rather than the isolation (kaivalya) of the self
with the binding principles, as is the goal of Patañjalian meditation, Tantric
visualization seeks a direct encounter (sa-ks.a-tka-ra) or an experience of the
identity of the deity and the self.
In order to demonstrate the process of Tantric visualization and to highlight
its distinctness from Patañjalian meditation, I would like to brieﬂy address the
visualization of Tripura- with a focus on her image (vigraha), man.d.ala, and

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

18

Mnemonics and Tantric visualization

mantra. In so doing, I am keeping in mind the mnemonic process and rather
than addressing the rituals associated with Tripura- exhaustively, I am itemizing
only the features that are crucial to understanding the cognitive domains.
What we observe in this practice is a template that is shared among all other
Tantric visualizations: they all have their speciﬁc mantras, man.d.alas, and
particular forms to visualize, and their visualization practice follows the same
pattern in the form of an ‘internal worship’ (antarya-ga).
The goddess Tripura- is visualized in her most popular form in four arms
carrying a rope, goad, bow, and arrows made of ﬂowers. She is sitting atop
Sada-śiva (who in turn sits atop Iśvara and other principal deities). Often
times, she is invoked as Ka-meśvarı-, the mistress of desire, and sits on the lap
of Ka-meśvara. Multiple layers of deities form the lower strata of her seat,
suggesting her sovereignty over them. The manuals indicate that the goddess
and her consort Śiva are identiﬁed with the two highest principles (tattvas),
Śiva and Śakti, among the 36 principles.16 Sada-śiva and Iśvara, two among

Figure 1.1 Śrı- Cakra

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Mnemonics and Tantric visualization

19

Figure 1.2 Tripura-

the deities providing seats, also ﬁgure as Tantric principles (34th and 33rd).
By equating the seats with successive strata of Tantric cosmology, the goddess
is the cause and controller of all the categories. To ‘see’ the goddess with the
mind’s eye thus recalls the entire philosophical scaﬀolding. The vertical
organization of the seat of the goddess also reﬂects the way the cosmos
evolves, with the higher principles giving rise to the ones in the lower strata.
This process clearly demonstrates the spatialization of categories also found
in mnemonic techniques.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

20

Mnemonics and Tantric visualization

This visualization becomes more and more complex as the practice and the
evocation of mantras progress. The most fundamental of her mantras is that
comprised of ﬁfteen letters, and these phonemes are viewed as identical to the
body of the goddess and her man.d.ala, Śrı- Cakra. Without going into detail of
what goes on in visualization while reciting this mantra, central aspects to be
recollected alongside the articulation of the ﬁfteen phonemes are:
1 Place the deity image in the heart of the aspirant.
2 Visualize the body (both of the aspirant and the deity) as identical to the
Śrı- Cakra, and establish the correlation of the phonemes of the mantra
within speciﬁc parts of the Cakra.
3 Visualize the deities associated with the speciﬁc groups of phonemes and
ﬁnd the correlation of these deities with the Cakra.
4 Attain awareness of the most subtle aspects of time successively fragmented into more and more subtle units and recollect the deity image, her
man.d.ala, and the mantra in a single ﬂash of consciousness.17
5 Cultivate an awareness of the sixfold categories identiﬁed as the ‘paths’
(adhvans), that are viewed within the body of the practitioner. This process
is called ‘installation’ (nya-sa).
6 Establish an awareness of oneness of the deity, preceptor, and aspirant.
7 In every cognitive mode, what is given is an object and its awareness, and
both are witnessed by the transcendent mode of consciousness. Focus on
this aspect of consciousness. Expand the duration of this experience by the
recognition that consciousness is the essential thread that weaves together
all the cognitive modes.
As the practice progresses, the entire Śrı- Cakra and the image of the goddess
are compressed, visualized in a single ﬂash of consciousness. What makes this
practice cognitively challenging is that the above listed items of visualization
are activated in a single stream of consciousness in addition to reciting the
ﬁfteen-syllable mantra of the goddess.18 The next step in visualizing Śrı- Cakra
involves bringing to mind all the deities in the area surrounding the goddess.
Sixteen Nitya- goddesses, for instance, surround the innermost triangle. Since
each of these deities has her own speciﬁc visualization, rituals and mantras,
viewing the goddess Tripura- alongside her associates in a single ﬂash of consciousness presupposes recollecting the entire system. By repeated association
of mantra with a particular image, the viewer can replace one aspect to the
other at will, ‘seeing’ the mantra as an image and vice versa.
Visualization becomes further involved when referencing texts such as
Yoginı-hr.daya (YH) or Varivasya-rahasya. These texts call for a focus on the
six-fold or sixteen-fold meanings of the mantra.19 Following YH, this mantra
recitation parallels bringing to mind a list of concepts:
1 Aﬃrmation of the oneness of Śiva and Śakti. Both these principles are
identiﬁed with the self-awareness that is both transcendent and immanent.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Mnemonics and Tantric visualization

21

2 Recognizing the correlation between the mantra and the Śaivite categories
(36 in total).
3 Establishing the oneness of the self and the supreme divinity (Tripura- in
this context).
4 Realizing the oneness of the mantra and Śrı- Cakra.
5 Identiﬁcation of the subject consciousness with the transcendental consciousness.
6 Identiﬁcation of the mantra and kun.d.alinı-, the serpentine force representing
the pra-n.ic energy. Each individual, following Tantras, embodies the totality of
the cosmic forces in its dormant form. Kun.d.alinı- represents this energy. This
step of practice identiﬁes speech or mantra with the cosmic energy.
Mantra, in this light, is a device that is used to bring to mind more than what
natural language allows. When multiple texts are engaged to decipher the
same mantra, we can conclude that mantras are used similar to mnemonic
devices in order to recollect what the subject ﬁnds essential to remember.
As for the image of the deity, it also does not have a ﬁxed form. In order to
integrate complex categories in the list of memory, or expand the scope of
visualization, Tantric practitioners bring to mind complex images of the deity.
For instance, the image of Tripura- is viewed with sixteen or 54 arms, in
addition to the goddess being visualized with one thousand arms and heads.
Ritual manuals suggest complex meanings of visualizing the multiple arms.
For instance, the image of the goddess with sixteen arms expands the scope of
meaning from the one with four arms. The four attributes of Tripura- are
associated with the mind (the bow), passion (the rope), aversion (the goad),
and the functions of the ﬁve sensory faculties (the arrows). The deity with
sixteen arms embodies an additional three deities, those of creation, sustenance,
and reabsorption, identiﬁed as Brahma-, Vis.n.u, and Rudra. To visualize the
deity with sixteen arms thus brings to mind sixteen diﬀerent roles the goddess
plays. The deity with 54 arms and 16 faces represents the integral form of all
the sixteen Nitya- deities while also representing the digits of the moon.
Besides other attributes, the goddess in this advanced visualization carries the
eight Ma-tr.ka- and ten Maha-vidya- deities. To bring this complex imagery of
Tripura- to mind is thus equivalent to remembering all these divinities. The
only diﬀerence is, when viewed in this consolidated image, all the deities (as
well as their systems) are brought to mind simultaneously.
Just like the mantra and her image, the man.d.ala of the goddess, identiﬁed
as Śrı- Cakra, is used in the same way to recollect all her essential aspects. It
has been outlined above that the goddess, her mantra, and the Śrı- Cakra are
identiﬁed in the visualization of Tripura-. This man.d.ala, in her pantheon, represents the cosmos and reﬂects the human body. The geometric design
comprised of nine intersecting triangles and two circles of eight and sixteen
petals enclosed by four gates is also a blueprint for the shrine of the goddess.
This man.d.ala hosts all the emanations of Tripura-, surrounded by Ma-tr.ka-s,
Bhairavas, and the protective deities. Meditating upon a man.d.ala consists of
viewing the goddess at the center, with her intimately close emanations

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

22

Mnemonics and Tantric visualization

encircling the triangular seat around the geometric center. Deities encircle the
goddess in numbers of eight, ten, ten, and fourteen triangles, along with those
populating the lotuses (with eight and sixteen petals) and the gates. Viewing a
man.d.ala is thus enacting the imagery of all the divinities surrounding the
shrine. Making the act of visualization further complex, manuals identify the
seed syllables and particular phonemes assigned to each of the centers. Viewing
the man.d.ala thus becomes a complex ritual of walking through the mental
space where diﬀerent names and forms are located in particular gates
and shrines inside the big complex. The practitioner walks through the constructed mental space and encounters diﬀerent deities seated in their speciﬁc
shrines, greeting them with their mantras. What is explicit in this detail is the
compression of multiple concepts into a single image so that the practitioner
can remember it at will. In this sense, analyzing Tantric visualization as a
mnemonic practice facilitates the comprehension of complex rituals in a
cognitive framework.

Cognitive engineering: mnemonic domains of visualization
A number of arguments can be made regarding the cognitive process involved
in the above-mentioned visualization of Tripura-. Most important is the overlap between imagining and remembering, as these two processes are equally
activated in visualization. Studies on human cognition provide further ways
to analyze how the diﬀerent cognitive modes can be integrated. Schacter and
Addis (2007) have strongly argued that there is a considerable overlap in the
cognitive processes of memory and imagination. The practice of visualization,
traditionally identiﬁed as anusmr.ti or bha-vana-, evokes both these aspects. As
memory, it brings to mind something that has been learned earlier, and as
imagination, it is a constructive process of encountering what has been given
through memory. In this process, the image is considered a living breathing
entity with which the practitioner engages in a dialogical relation, animating
the constructs given as concepts. While the various categories and the
group of deities and their corresponding mantras are learned earlier and are
recollected, the correspondence of diﬀerent mantras and deities, the animation
of the deity in a sense of bringing the image to life and making ritual oﬀerings,
establishing connection between the self and the deity, and various other
categories, all rest on imagination.
If the Tantric practice of visualization is understood following the above
description, what lies in long-term memory – the entire cosmology that
weaves the subject and his surroundings within the mental planes of the
observer, and the complex philosophies and meticulous correlations of their
categories – is brought to short-term memory at the moment of activation
through ritual. Imagination plays a crucial role in formation and activation of
both these memories. These processes also allow the mind to synthesize
abstract concepts and incorporate complex ideas within a single concept.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Mnemonics and Tantric visualization

23

The quality of memory and imagination rests on the attentive state of
consciousness, and the practice of meditation meticulously instructs the
practitioner how he can enhance his attentive power. Attention describes the
directionality of consciousness towards its intentional object. It is common
knowledge that discrete consciousness lacks directionality, and as a form of
passive knowing, does not constitute memory. This intricate relation between
memory and attention also has an overlap in Sanskrit language, where
dhya-na or synonyms such as anusmr.ti are used to describe both attention and
memory.
Two of the contemporary theories of attention, one based on limitation in
the conscious subject’s capacity to engage with multiple thoughts, and
the action-based theories that describe attention in terms of performing a
single action, both illuminate some of the nuances involved in visualization.
The visualization process is unique in that multiple objects are attained in a
single ﬂash of consciousness. The practice of visualization thus identiﬁes that
attention is distinct from volition; it is not consciousness itself but a mode of
it, and is nonetheless distinct from states of consciousness such as perceiving
or dreaming. When one is visualizing, one is also being attentive to the
images and sounds that play in the mind. Jess Prinz (2005) and Stanislas
Dahaene (et al. 2006) argue that the primary role of attention is to project
already-processed representations to working memory. In their understanding,
the content that comes to conscious awareness is what is projected to working
memory. The focus on attention during the course of visualization can be
explained in this light: these practices are to constitute memories of the imagined
entities so that they become more and more real.
While attention provides coherence or assists in determining a particular
action, with a resultant aﬃnity with functional theories, the complex processing
that occurs in man.d.ala visualization with mantra recitation where multiple
entities are simultaneously brought to mind through anusmr.ti, or dhya-na,
cannot be reduced to contemporary models of attention. Addressing what
constitutes memory, Vaiśes.ika philosophers outline that there are three distinct types of pratyayas, or concepts: pat.u, abhya-sa, and a-dara. Pat.u refers to
the heightened mode of attention occurring during the rise of concepts.
Accordingly, experiences to which great attention is paid constitute more
lasting sam
. skaras. Abhyasa refers to the sam
. skaras generated by repetition of
the same concept. Accordingly, even the concepts given lesser attention can
constitute lasting sam
. skaras if they are replayed in the mind. The next, adara,
20
relates to surprise, stupiﬁcation, wonder, shock, or horror. Vatsyayana provides a larger list for the cause of sam
. skaras that can be broadly analyzed by
applying schemata theory. In the context of visualization, the same concept
(pratyaya) is regenerated in diﬀerent forms by repetition, attention, and
generating supportive emotions.
Attention and short-term visual memory are deeply interlinked. Mantras
are generally comprised of limited letters and can be read in 30 seconds. This
is about the same time-frame given by cognitive scientists for the extension of

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

24

Mnemonics and Tantric visualization

short-term visual memory. Tantric practices, however, evolve, as they aim to
stretch the interval of attentive consciousness and thereby expand the capacity
of short-term memory. When longer mantras are recited, meticulous eﬀort is
given to having the entire text memorized so that all the phonemes can be
brought forth in the mind’s eye in a ﬂash of consciousness. The technique
rests on compression and transformation of the text to image. This economy
in time by transformation of text to image allows the practitioner to view the
entire mantra in his mental space in a single ﬂash of consciousness, even when
the mantras are longer. This compression is just the beginning of what lies
ahead, as the subject is instructed to bring the active presence of given
cosmologies and diﬀerent correlates of mantra into the same instantaneous
time span. In light of this alternative perspective on the duration and scope of
memory, the so-called “capacity limit of visual short term memory” (Todd
and Marlos 2004) needs to be revisited, as the meticulous practice of visualization that evolved over millennia suggests otherwise. These practices also
prescribe simultaneously activating multiple domains of reference, deviating
from the ways attention has been understood today.
One of the points for the cognitive scientists to take home from this analysis
is that the structures and images utilized in the storage and retrieval of
memory help us analyze the issue of what makes some images more memorable
than others, which Isola, Parikh and other scholars have examined.21 These
scholars have argued that images of enclosed spaces containing people with
visible faces are easier to remember at a later time compared to images of
vistas and peaceful scenes. Visualizing man.d.alas fully exploits this technique.
Studies have also revealed that bizarre factors aid memory preservation and
retrieval. It is interesting to see that Tantric image processing applies all of the
above-mentioned techniques and organization, including bizarre elements in
the images, and enclosed structures where images are viewed.
The process whereby graphic details of visualization activate in memory the
entire teachings of a particular school by means of some basic conceptual
structure helps to shed light on the area of organizational memory. The subject’s autonomy over the entities of recall and his organizational ability to
retain and recall the experiences from the past are two diﬀerent poles of the
same issue, of the role organization plays in recall.22 It has been known for
quite some time (Perkins 1932: 473–90) that memory organization tends
towards symmetry and balance. Organizing objects to be remembered in a
coherent structure (as has been observed in the visualization techniques)
reﬂects the same theme of the centrality of symmetric organization.
While the debate over localized or distributed memory is not over, recent
research in neurology and human cognitive behavior suggests that verbal and
visual memories are stored in two diﬀerent lobes of the brain. The Tantric
strategy to incorporate image and language in generating memory images
demonstrates what constitutes a strong memory experience. The goal of such
practice is to create an experience during which the subject undergoes a direct
encounter in the act of visualization. In this process, the subject’s mode of

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Mnemonics and Tantric visualization

25

consciousness shifts from imagination to recollection, giving the subject a
sense of direct encounter, whether it is that of the deity brought to the mind,
or any other object.
In creating mnemonic tools for remembering the entire system, Tantric
visualization has compressed multiple images and texts. This process has not
only integrated diﬀerent aspects of the same deity and created a single image
that narrates all her roles and aspects, various deities are compressed within a
single image. I will address this aspect in a separate chapter, when exploring
the theory of cognitive blend, as proposed by Fauconnier. For the present
context, image and schemata play crucial roles in shaping both cognition and
memory. These are the products of our attention and shape deeper levels of
cognition.23 We perceive our environment based on given parameters of preattentive order. By re-shaping reality in a speciﬁc way, Tantric practitioners
are conditioning their perception, where the experiences they have and the
reality they live in are interlinked with the experiencing subject. Tantric subjects,
along these lines, are not just situated in reality but are also its creators.
When these skillfully constructed structures are considered as mental images,
cognitive scientists will have to revisit the standard theory that ‘mental images are
representations,’ (Richardson 1980), since the images Tantric practitioners construct in mind are distinct from the images derived from retinal contact.
Furthermore, the orthodox model of dissociating verbal memory and mental
imagery falls short when dealing with Tantric literature which outlines a
synesthetic representation, wherein speech and vision become one at the level
of paśyantı- or the speech that is seeing, which then culminates in the transcendent state of ‘experiencing’ alone (identiﬁed with the term para- and deiﬁed
as Para-). Tantric philosophers consider it a non-dual state, where the dichotomy
of subject and object collapses. Due to the integration of cognitive faculties
that are otherwise giving rise to distinction, Tantric philosophers identify this
altered state of consciousness as the commingling of ﬂuids (samarasa), union
(yoga), the great void (maha-śu-nya), and so on. In this state, there is just an
active mode of consciousness in terms of experiencing, and the dichotomy of
subject and object does not exist.
As an image generated in the mind, the three visual forms of mantra,
man.d.ala, and deity converge in a single image that does not exist in the outside
world. When evoked, not all aspects of this image may manifest in the mind,
and a partial image will then stand for the concept. The gradual cultivation of
images in visualization thus provides textual and ethnographic material for
advancing our understanding of concept formation.24 There are some images,
particularly of the deity man.d.alas but sometimes of the deity alone, that come
inscribed with mantras. This integration of image and speech depicts the complex
visualization process where diﬀerent modes of recollection are merged.
In essence, visualization is one of the central constituents of Tantric practice, and engaging the cognitive approach allows us to address some of its archaic
aspects. While the images visualized consist of deities and man.d.alas that are
associated with ritual practice, the materials incorporated in the progressive

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

26

Mnemonics and Tantric visualization

stages of visualization provide insight into how mnemonics has played a role
in developing these Tantric practices. The two-fold goals of visualization
are to have a direct-encounter (sa-ks.a-tka-ra), and have the transformative eﬀects,
including magical powers called ‘perfections’ (siddhis). The direct-encounter type
of experience can be generated by meticulous visualization. The experiences
engendered by repeated practice can be so strong that the boundary between
memory derived from encountering something phenomenal and that cultivated
through the practice of visualization collapses. Through these deep contemplative
practices, one’s self-estimation and response to the world and various stimuli
are remapped, allowing the individual to engineer his own experience.

Notes
1 For imagination and visualization, see Timalsina 2014; McGinn 2004; Brann 1991;
Casey 1976, 2000; Flanagan 2000; Harris 2000; Kosslyn 1996; O’Shaughnessy 1981;
Pylyshyn 1981; Sartre 1966; Scruton 1974; Strawson 1970; and Warnock 1976.
2 Einstein and McDaniel 2004.
3 Esgate and Groome 2005. See also Benjaﬁeld 2007.
4 Worthen 2006.
5 Groninger 1971: 161–63.
6 Carson and Langer 2006: 29–34.
7 Paivio 1971, 1986, 1991. See also Johnson et al. 1996: 115; and Thomas 2011.
8 For criticism of Paivio’s theory, see Sternberg 2003.
9 For a detailed analysis of paśyantı-, see Padoux 1990; and Iyer 1992.
10 For the contemporary studies on mental images, see Sternberg 2006 and Shepard
1982.
11 For groundbreaking works on mental imagery, see the Journal of Mental Imagery.
See Akhter 1977 for eidetic imagery and the formation of language.
12 For a general introduction to yantra/cakra, see Rabe 2001: 434–46; and Lidke
2011: 248–57.
13 For discussions on dha-ran.a- and dhya-na, see Whicher 1993, 1998; Vasudeva 2004;
and Grönbold 1996.
14 What Patañjali prescribes as the continuation of a single stream of consciousness
(pratyayaikata-nata-) needs to be explained, whether he meant the duration of a
single concept (pratyaya) over the span of time or a sequence of similar supportive
concepts.
15 Sati or smr.ti in Buddhist meditative practices, anusmr.ti in subsequent Tantric texts
or the use of tarka for similar discursive methods have a diﬀerent signiﬁcance and
history. When discussing yoga, Maha-bha-rata, a text much earlier than the Yogasu-tra of Patañjali, lists smr.ti as a yogic limb. For further discussion, see Gyatso
1992.
16 For the visualization of Tripura-, see Nitya-s.od.aśika-rn.ava. For the manual for
visualizing Tripura-’s seats as 36 principles, see Śrı-vidya-rn.avatantra. For a detailed
exposition of the symbolism of Tripura- mantra and her gestures, see Yoginı-hr.daya.
For studies on Tripura-, see Brooks 1990.
17 I am referring to the meditative practice outlined in the Yoginı-hr.daya, particularly
the section on mantra, with regard to the attention on aspects of time.
18 Commentators wrestle over the particular mantra recited during this course. The
mantra that begins with the letter /ha/ is called Ha-di that reads as ha-sa-ka-la-hrı-m
.- , and the one that starts with /ka/ is called Ka-di,
ha-sa-ka-ha-la-hrı-m
. -sa-ka-la-hrım
.
- -sa-ka-la-hrı-m.
and it reads as ka-e-ı--la-hrı-m
. -ha-sa-ka-ha-la-hrım
.
.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Mnemonics and Tantric visualization

27

19 For a detailed analysis of the visualization of mantra in the tradition of Tripura-,
see Timalsina 2005. The way mantras are used to recollect the entire system,
without being conﬁned in a linear sense of meaning, can be compared with the
memory device lukasa of the Luba people (Roberts and Roberts 1996: 22–35,
101–3). For the discourse on mantra and gender, see Biernacki 2007.
.
20 For discussion, see Pada-rthadharmasangraha (625–26); Nya-yalı-la-vatı- (p. 862).
21 For studies, see Isola et al. 2011: 145–52.
22 Two fronts of this issue are discussed by Argyris and Schon (1978: 11), who on one
hand argue that organizational memory is only a metaphor or that an organizational strategy do not contribute to memory and on the other, Sandelands and
Stablein (1987: 136) who argue that organizations are mental entities capable of
thought.
23 Tuan 1975.
24 See Tall and Vinner 1981: 151–69.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

This page intentionally left blank

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Section 2

Image, metonymy,
and metaphors

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

This page intentionally left blank

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

2

Metonymic structure of Tantric images

The ingenuity of the human mind has been expressed in art since the beginning
of civilization, whether in Paleolithic cave paintings or the pyramid sphinx
depicting a man-lion. Tantric culture is very recent by comparison. This culture,
however, has kept the discourse of images vibrant in the realm of the sacred.
Besides the statues in shrines and man.d.alas populated with deity images,
Tantric practice heavily relies on visualization. This practice consists of projecting
mental images, their animation, and various mental activities that include
treating these images as alive. In addition to constructing and animating
images in the mental space, this process also involves deciphering them, or
ﬁnding correlations between the deity image and the aspirant’s worldview.
The following summary of Ks.emara-ja’s (11th C.) portrayal of the image of
Bhairava can explain these complex processes.1
By carrying the skull of Brahma-, the deity displays his ﬁvefold powers of
awareness, bliss, will, knowledge, and action, and by holding contradictory
elements, the deity depicts harmony. With his opened eyes, Bhairava
portrays immanence; his skull cup ﬁlled with blood depicts the paradoxical nature of Bhairava consciousness that is always in the transcendent state while being actively engaged with his senses turning outwards
towards objects. Cremation ground, the residence of Bhairava, signiﬁes
pure consciousness; the deity’s garland of hands and heads portrays that
individual identities dissolve in Bhairava; and the entrails the deity wears
depict bodily bondage. The lion’s skin draped over his body signiﬁes the
illusory nature of the world; and the sword the deity carries corresponds
to the removal of mental constructs. The shield of Bhairava represents
protection from fear, and the rope stands for time. The hook signiﬁes the
all-encompassing Bhairava nature of bliss and awareness; the bow and
arrows demonstrate the reabsorption of the gods in the lower realms into
the deity; the gestures of boons and fearlessness portray the liberating
nature of the deity; the skull-staﬀ stands for the self as the foundation of
creation; the musical instruments the deity carries such as lute, bell, and
drum represent control over mental constructs; the trident refers to the
triadic deities; and the bolt signiﬁes that Bhairava consciousness pervades

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

32

Metonymic structure of Tantric images
all manifestations. Bhairava’s stick portrays command, and his club and
axe signify the removal of duality. The deity holding a citron suggests that
consciousness is the seminal nature of the world. The nudity of Bhairava
stands for his freedom, and his dark color relates to his all-absorbing
nature. His third eye portrays the witnessing nature of the self even when
immersed in sensory pleasure.2

The scope of this chapter is neither to itemize the ways images have been portrayed in Tantras, nor to decipher them following classical or contemporary
readings. From the above depiction of Bhairava, what needs to be answered
is, how does Ks.emara-ja arrive at this complex relationship of signiﬁers? And,
what faculty underlies this process while developing opaque images with perplexing forms? In this chapter, the cognitive approach to Tantric images seeks
to unravel the conceptual framework at play in emergence and sustenance of
Tantric visual culture and the practice of visualization.
In addition to Tantric images being religious symbols, these express the
ingenuity of the human mind in integrating art and worldview.3 This book,
however, is not about these images standing for the absolute in varied forms.
The question never explored in depth is, why this language? What inspires the
Tantrics, whether living in palaces or strolling in cremation grounds, to
encounter the transcendent in such unique imagery? Exploring the cognitive
domains of Tantric symbolism, particularly analyzing metonymic structures,
metaphoric expressions, and cognitive integration of various concepts into one,
allows us to penetrate beneath the opaque forms and derive some understanding
of this visual culture.
When outlining the salient features of art, Merlin Donald states that ‘art
should be regarded as a speciﬁc kind of cognitive engineering.’4 While we do
not need to analyze Tantric art to understand the cognitive processes at play,
reading these images helps ground the creative aspect of human mind that
gives rise to images. This opens up a space for advancing the argument for a
cognitive study of visualization practices. Donald adds, ‘art is constructive in
nature, aimed at the deliberate reﬁnement and elaboration of mental models
and worldviews (p. 4).’ This is explicit in Tantric images. With the emergence
of these forms, the creative minds (whether the artists drawing or sculpting or
the practitioners visualizing images) have mapped their worldviews within
images and the above description of the image of Bhairava is just one example. The intriguing question is, what is the system beneath this cognitive
mapping, wherein a worldview is projected onto images, or images are made
to depict a speciﬁc worldview? Reading metonymic structure is an attempt to
unravel these most basic principles.

Metonymic framework
In their pioneering work, Lakoﬀ and Johnson (1980) point out that metaphor
and metonymy are not just poetic devices but are common tools of

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Metonymic structure of Tantric images

33

communication and fundamental to our process of conceptualization. Lakoﬀ
(1987) explores the cognitive mechanisms that are at play when we categorize
things. When providing cognitive models in order to describe conceptual
structure, he observes that our thinking process is embodied, and has imaginative
character and gestalt properties.5
Metonymy pervades our cognitive activity. In this, we take one easy-tocomprehend aspect of an entity and use it to stand for something else. In the
above example of Bhairava, eyes are used to describe seeing, musical instruments
represent music, the shield stands for protection, or the head for individuality.
There is a relation of cause-for-eﬀect or part-for-whole in most examples
given above. In metonymic thinking, certain acts are represented instead of
the person doing the act, the place for the event, and so on. Lakoﬀ explains
that in metonymy, some subcategory or member or submodel is used to
comprehend the category as a whole or a part used to stand for the whole
(1987, 79). This something (A) standing for something else (B), as Lakoﬀ and
Johnson have pointed out, is one of the most common cognitive traits that
facilitate organization of our thoughts, and is common across cultures. When
something (A) stands for something else (B), A is identiﬁed as the source and
B as the target. This is why metonymic structure is easier to form and is more
prevalent than metaphors.6
Although the role of metaphoric thinking in our evolution of cognition has
been extensively analyzed in recent decades, studies on metonymy have not
received the same level of attention. In our case, metonymy is foundational
for understanding Tantric images. Analyzing the metonymic structure of human
cognition helps us ground the art of Tantric images and its culture of visualization, allowing us to identify the underlying principles. The metonymic
process is essential among the cognitive tools in the sequence of forming ideas
and archiving them in memory. Tantric language in general and its images in
particular provide a ﬁeld for understanding how the metonymic process has
been used in articulating cultural archetypes and worldviews. Metonymy is
even more basic than metaphor, as it requires a less complicated cognitive
process. This makes metonymic thinking extremely ubiquitous. Analyzing
this process in understanding Tantric images thus aims to not just understand
the perplexing variety of images (which in itself is a daunting task), but also to
address why such mechanisms are at play in the very ﬁrst place.
The evolutionary model of human cognition explores the basis for the rise
of concepts in our embodied state. This process can be explained in the
following terms:
bodily experience ! metonymy ! metaphor ! abstract concepts
(Yu in Gibbs 2008: 249)
Since both metonymy and metaphor rely on a similar cognitive mechanism,
one could make a general statement that both are identical.7 However, the
relations upon which these rest, or the networks activated in giving rise to

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

34

Metonymic structure of Tantric images

metonymy and metaphor are diﬀerent, and therefore the role of metaphor is
explored separately in the next chapter. To reiterate, metonymy is a conceptual
mapping within a domain that involves a ‘stands-for’ relationship between the
source and target domains and is used primarily for reference.8
Metonymy and metaphor, two among the most prominent conventional
mental mechanisms, have many similarities. It has been established that all
metaphoric associations are grounded in metonymy. In general, metaphor is
based on similarity whereas metonymy is on contiguity, and metaphor oﬀers
alternative conceptualizations for the same phenomenon while metonymy
links phenomena to each other. Following Croft, “a metonymic mapping
occurs within a single domain matrix, not across domains.”9 Thus the diﬀerence between metonymy and metaphor is maintained on the ground that
metonymy is a single domain mechanism whereas metaphor relies on two
distinct source and target domains. In metaphor, we can have multiple mappings between two domains, whereas in the case of metonymy, we can have
only one relation. In metaphor, the relation is “target is source,” whereas
metonymy can be characterized as “source for target.” Following the structuralists, metaphor is associated with the principles of selection and substitution, whereas metonymy is linked with the principles of combination and
contexture (Jakobson 1971). Metaphor and metonymy are viewed as conceptual
phenomena through the perspective of cognitive semantics. Conventional
metaphors and metonymies reveal an automatic connection between two
conceptual structures. The metaphors and metonymies that are commonly
grasped and expressed in communication are often particular manifestations
of a more abstract superordinate metaphor and metonymy that are, to a large
extent, culturally-speciﬁc and ‘contingent’ in that the source and target
relation is not necessary.10
Due to the overlap between metaphor and metonymy, some confusion has
arisen in contemporary scholarship. Some scholars have proposed two types
of metaphors to resolve this problem: ones seen from the point of view of the
mapping process, and those distinguished by the nature of the domains
involved. When we say, “the boy is a lion,” one aspect of lion, ferociousness,
is mapped. Single-correspondence metaphors bring one aspect of the target
domain into focus that is then applied to the source. Metonymy cannot be
other than a single-correspondence mapping because it highlights one attribute of the target. A way to distinguish between these two is to recognize that
metonymy is domain-internal and metaphor is domain-external. In some
cases, the source domain is a subdomain of the target, and in others, the
target domain is the subdomain of the source.
Keeping this cognitive framework in mind helps us pave the path for
understanding some of the complex issues in Tantric studies, and speciﬁcally
allows the unraveling of meaning embedded beneath a wide range of Tantric
images. Just like other cognitive activities, the visualization of images rests on
select mechanisms and the argument here is, the metonymic process is at play
in both the inscription and description of the symbols under investigation.

Metonymic structure of Tantric images

35

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Varieties of Tantric language
Tantras detail the visualization of a plethora of deities. In addition, they also
decipher the attributes of these deities. When these texts assign particular
meaning to a weapon or gesture, or decipher mantra in a particular manner by
assigning words to speciﬁc letters, they follow metonymic order. In order
to establish this claim, this chapter examines the salient features of Tantric
language, their semiotic structure, and their overarching philosophies. While
some of the constituents in Tantra are uniquely distinct from the larger
pan-Indian culture, there is signiﬁcant overlap in these traditions, and it is not
possible to read Tantric culture, their symbolism, and speciﬁcally their
language, in isolation from the wider cultural context. Furthermore, since
cultural categories are always in ﬂux and shape each other, it is not possible
to address any cultural phenomenon in totality without addressing others. It
is commonly accepted that meaning is not frozen in time, as it evolves in
assimilative and dissociative processes of cultural expression. It is therefore
not the claim of this book that it will reveal once for all the hidden structures of Tantric symbolism. It is just one step towards deciphering cultural
symbolism.11
Besides using common languages and borrowing images from the wider
Indian culture, Tantras develop their own terminology and eventually a
language that relies on its own semiotic system. If read without paying attention
to this internal meaning system, Tantric texts are obscure, paradoxical, and
extremely graphic. Traditionally speaking, they are composed for the initiates,
and these texts adopt private signs or are used like personal notes. Although
textualized, the dissemination process in Tantra is always dialogical, shared
only to the initiate by the preceptor, and there is always something shared in
person, in addition to what one can comprehend by reading texts. This private
nature of Tantric language is epitomized in the conversation between Śiva
and Śakti. Besides using conventional language for transmitting their knowledge,
Tantras utilize gestures and images in their discourse. These additional devices
of communication make Tantric language somewhat private, as the signs used
here are meaningful only in the sense of creating a ‘ritual dialogue’ between the
aspirant and the deity. This is not to argue that there is no universal domain
of Tantric symbolism. While tracing the internal system of signiﬁcance, this
chapter points out the salient features that constitute Tantric language distinct
from conventional language.
One of the most common features of Tantric language is deciphering mantras
by establishing a correlation between particular phonemes and the particular
words used to denote these phonemes. One needs to understand a complex
system of relations before making sense of this reference system. Each Tantra
may apply its own system of inscription, and so it is not possible to address
this issue in detail. While there are even books to decipher the Tantric codes,
Tantric texts often hint at this deciphering process. In order to advance the
argument, a few instances are analyzed here.12

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

36

Metonymic structure of Tantric images

Tantric texts in general divide the Sanskrit phonemes into eight groups, and
citing the group number and the sequence of the phoneme in that group may
be one way of inscription. For instance, if the text says, the last of the ﬁfth
and sixth, accompanied by visarga, this refers to namah.. In this, phonemes
are replaced by numbers. The same phonemes are also linked with the
elements. So, if the text says, air accompanied by ﬁre, its intended meaning is
the two phonemes /ha/ and /ra/. Although there may be multiple syllables in
the group of ﬁre, one has to choose by relying on the context to identify the
speciﬁc phoneme. Tantric texts identify this process of deciphering itself as
one of the layers of meaning.13 Although the general convention is that
Tantras have used this cryptic system of reference to keep the practice secret,
there are many reasons to ﬁnd answers beyond this. Thinking about mantras
requires ﬁnding the relation of a word and its signiﬁed phoneme. This relation
becomes complex when the aspirant is asked to also ﬁnd the correlation
between the mantra, the deity, and her man.d.ala, and integrate these concepts
with the self-experience of the meditating subject. The metonymic ‘standingfor’ relation is at play in constituting these networks. Utilizing the metonymic

Figure 2.1 Bhairava

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Metonymic structure of Tantric images

37

system, the Tantric inscription process displays a complex cognitive activity
essential to visualization. The deciphering process is called ‘retrieval’
(uddha-ra) or restoration. Another common practice in this ‘restoration’ is to
identify the correlating phonemes, when the limbs of the body are mentioned
in a text. In Tantric practice, phonemes are projected onto the body. When an
aspirant knows this system, he can understand when the text mentions select
body parts, as they are in fact referring to the phonemes that are installed in
those speciﬁc limbs. In this case, the limbs stand for the phonemes. Accordingly,
if the text says ‘left eye,’ it may refer to the phoneme /ı-/.
Tantric studies are incomplete as long as the uniqueness of its language is
not addressed. Metonymy is one cognitive mechanism that is applicable, not
just to explain Tantric images but also to help understand the ways Tantric
texts establish relations between diﬀerent signs and their references. In most
instances, the process of inscription is complex and requires familiarity with
the Tantric worldview for decoding the symbols. For example, the seed syllable
14
of the goddess, /hrı-m
. /, is deciphered as follows:
viyad (sky)
vı-tihotra

-ı-ka-ra
ardhendu
(half moon)

= h (because the letter ‘h’ is guttural, situated in the throat
cakra that signiﬁes the sky. The letter /h/ is thus the seed
syllable for the sky.)
= Agni (ﬁre) = r (because the letter is at the center of the
man.ipura cakra, the center of ﬁre). The name Vı-tihotra
also reminds one of the son of Priyavrata and grandson of
Manu. This link invokes the ﬁre ritual conducted by him.
= the letter ‘ı-’
=m
. (because the nasal (anusvara) sound is depicted in
Śarada and some other Indian scripts as a half circle that
resembles the crescent moon).

There is no economy of space in deciphering one syllable by aid of four that
in turn invoke various mythical connections. The deciphering process often
allows the practitioner to relate the phonemes in the mantra with a broader
Tantric cosmology.
In another example, the mantra of Tripura- is deciphered as follows:15
ka-ma
yoni

kamalavajrapa-n.i

= ka (because the word ka-ma begins with the letter ‘k’)
= trikon.a (triangle)
= e (because the letter ‘e’ is written as a triangle in
the Śa-rada- script, and a triangle represents the vulva
in Indian culture)
= -ı (because it is written as a vertical curve that
represents the serpentine force, the goddess)
= Indra = la (because the syllable ‘la’ is in the base
cakra, the position of Indra)

38

Metonymic structure of Tantric images
guha- (cave)

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

hasama-tariśvan (wind)

abhra (cloud)
Indra
guhasakalama-ya- (the
magical power)

= hrı-m
. (because this is the heart mantra and the cave
refers to the heart)
= the syllables ‘ha’ and ‘sa’
= ka (Ka-ma and jı-va are interlinked with the speciﬁc
breath called apa-na. So, the letter ‘ka’ refers speciﬁcally
to the kandarpa-va-yu, or the pra-n.ic energy linked with
sexuality)
= ha (because cloud is in the sky and h is the syllable
of the sky)
= la (mentioned above)
= hrı-m
.
= the syllables ‘sa,’ ‘ka,’ and ‘la’
= hrı-m
. (because this is the seed syllable of the
goddess)

The process of deciphering mantras is only one of the unique aspects of Tantric
language. Tantric deities display various gestures, and accompanying rituals rely
on the articulation of gestures that carry their own meaning. There are gestures
for welcoming the deity, oﬀering the deity a seat, making the ﬁve essential
oﬀerings of fragrance, ﬂower, incense, lamp, and food, and the gesture of
farewell at the end of the ritual. Each speciﬁc mode of ritual relies on the
display of gestures along with articulating mantras. There are gestures speciﬁc to
.
deities, such as the gesture of linga that is displayed for Śiva or the yoni gesture
for the goddess. There are also the gestures named after deities.16 Ritual gestures
have their own history, originating in Vedic times, and Bharata’s Na-t.yaśa-stra
is one of the earliest repositories documenting them. Tantras introduce hundreds
of new gestures and use them as means to ‘communicate’ with deities. To
display a gesture called ‘welcoming’ is thus welcoming the deity, and to show
the gesture of oﬀering signiﬁes oﬀering. Although speech is used during the
process, the ritual is considered incomplete if not accompanied with the hand
gestures. On some occasions, these gestures can replace mantras or the speech
used to make the oﬀering, and in other cases, they can also replace the substance being oﬀered. One can thus display the cow-gesture (dhenu-mudra-) and
expect the same ritual eﬃcacy as is generated by oﬀering milk.17 Just like
words are collection of phonemes and a particular sequence of phonemes
expresses meaning, so also is the body the repository of meaning, and gestures
are like words, expressing particular meaning from all the potentials that lie
within the body of the aspirant.
To identify just a few, some gestures and their meanings follow:
vara
abhaya
tarjanıkavaca
dhenu

blessing (because it has the hand position of giving)
protection (because it shows extending support)
threatening (the raised index ﬁnger)
shield (protection because it shields the torso)
cow gesture for puriﬁcation (because cow’s milk is pure)

Metonymic structure of Tantric images
meru

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

jña-na

39

Mount Meru for summoning (because deities reside on the
mountain)
wisdom (this is the gesture of lecturing)

The meaning of gestures is derived from both the embodied experience and
cultural presuppositions. For instance, the gesture of boons (vara) is displayed
with open palm facing down, suggesting giving. The gesture of protection,
abhaya, is displayed with the open palm held up. The gesture of shield (kavaca)
is displayed by covering the chest with hands crossed and ﬁngers touching the
shoulders, protecting the body. Most of the gestures, however, are culturespeciﬁc. The gesture of wisdom (jña-na), with thumb and foreﬁnger touching
and three ﬁngers held erect, suggests lecturing, as knowledge is transmitted
through discourse. This gesture is common to Hindu, Buddhist, and Jain
masters giving lectures. Other gestures are more esoteric and hard to decipher
without knowing the cultural sign system. The gesture identiﬁed as Mt. Meru
has the middle ﬁngers facing up, depicting the mountain. This relies on the
centrality of Mt. Meru in Indian cosmology. The gesture of puriﬁcation, identiﬁed as the ‘cow gesture’ (dhenu mudra-) imitates the cow’s udder, with ﬁngers
suggesting nipples. This meaning emerges from the role of the cow in Indian
culture. In these cases, it is farfetched to posit a universal meaning. The ten
gestures of Tripura- displayed in the ritual worship of the ten layers of Śrı- Cakra,
for instance, are meaningful only in light of the texts such as Yoginı-hr.daya.
Besides these modes of Tantric communication, there are other languages,
such as using code words the practitioners are supposed to know, as the
Yoginı-s they are seeking communion with might manifest and show the gestures
or use the words for speciﬁc purposes. For instance:18
Technical terms (Chummaka-)
signiﬁer

signiﬁed

Sacred abode

God (Bhairava)

All-bestowing preceptor
Mountain
practitioner
Strength-bestowing meat
Nectar
blood
Lotus root
entrails
Moon
semen
Thread
nerves
Covering
night
Light
day
Satisfying
penis
Love-growing vagina
Separating
weapon
Means
food
Protector
mother

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

40

Metonymic structure of Tantric images
Creator
Sight
Foundation
Secret
Hard
Polluting
Young
Means
Command
Night-roamer

father
eye
belly
heart
bone
excrement
goat
recitation
desire
cat

The application of metonymy is clearly visible in this esoteric language,
although it is diﬃcult to ﬁnd the exact connotation in all contexts and many
of them are culture speciﬁc. Some of them are possible to understand, for
instance, articulating the word ‘mountain’ when meaning ‘practitioner.’ Just
like a mountain, a practitioner does not shake, or a practitioner dwells on a
mountain. The word ‘strengthening’ refers to meat, as it nourishes the body.
As blood is oﬀered for the spirits as their rejuvenating substance, the term
blood means nectar. Or, it is blood that sustains the body. Moon and semen
have a resemblance in their color, and they both have bliss as a common
factor. Nights metaphorically cover reality, because you can’t see in the dark.
Protector and creator, the attributes for mother and father, describe the cultural
connotations where mother is viewed as protector and the father as creator.
The substitution of sight for eyes describes the role for the instrument. ‘Secret’
for heart describes an internal organ as hidden. Along these lines, most of the
Chummaka signiﬁers can be deciphered through the metonymic process.
In the above examples, a word or gesture (A) stands for something else (B),
and the system of reference is linear. This, however, is not the case with
complex Tantric symbols. Relying on diﬀerent processes of suggestion, Tantras
also utilize a language of cross-referentiality with multiple, layered meanings.
For instance:
ha
sky
ya
air
ra
ﬁre
va
water
la
earth

circle
hexagon
triangle
half circle
square

no color
smoky
red
white
yellow

In this section, the letter, geometric form, and the element can refer to any of
the others within the same category. In other words, one can use the syllable
/ha/ and mean sky or a circle, and can also use a word ‘sky’ and mean a
circle or the syllable /ha/. The Tantric convention of the letters corresponding
to the elements rests on this symbolic paradigm. This symbolism manifests as
a consequence of a series of condensations and representations, and varied
Tantric disciplines play in giving rise to this cross-domain referentiality.

Metonymic structure of Tantric images

41

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Metonymy, memory, and visualization
The Tantric ritual of visualization brings into play two diﬀerent kinds of input
that perform diﬀerent functions. Both the cognitive mechanisms of comprehending language and identifying an image are at play when one visualizes an
image. The practitioner brings to mind an image and also recites mantras of
the corresponding deity. Ritual proceeds with making the image more and
more alive, with movements assigned to the image. A cognitive link is established
in this practice of processing two diﬀerent inputs of speech and images. This
results in the subject’s transformative experience, with the subject sometimes
having an altered state of consciousness (the instance of possession being
commonly known19). Visualization does not end with a mental representation
of an external image. Viewing an image of Nat.ara-ja, for instance, culminates
in experiencing the presence of Lord Śiva in his cosmic dance. Bringing an
image of Durga- to mind is witnessing the battle of the goddess with the
demon Mahis.a. The fusion of image and language in the act of visualization
thus culminates with merging memory and imagination, giving the subject a
vivid experience.20 Aspirants report having a ‘direct encounter’ (sa-ks.a-tka-ra)
as a result of this practice.
Through the metonymic process of contiguity, images relate to one another,
and to their abstract meanings. Similar to mnemonic images, these images
support the process of memorization. While there may be no visible similarity
between mantras, man.d.alas, and the deity being visualized, they merge in
rituals, as it is in the ritual that all these are brought to life.
Aspects of an image remind one of the particular roles the deity plays and
therefore metonymically stand for what they suggest. Visualization, a process
of relaying textual information through visual encoded system, presupposes that the subject of observation is familiar with 1) the image, 2) the myths
surrounding the image, and 3) theology and cosmology governing that image.
For instance, when one sees an image of Ardhana-rı-śvara, the blended image
of Śiva and Śakti, the viewer will have multiple responses where diﬀerent
cognitive domains are invoked through the metonymic process of contiguity.
The image arises from an embodied relationship with the divine: just like our
bodies, divine bodies also represent a fusion of masculine and feminine
aspects. In viewing this image where the Lord is half woman, the virility of
the bull and the valor of the lion are cognized through their association with
the characters Śiva and Śakti. The weapons and garments of the deities can
be deciphered following the overarching myth. For instance, in the image of
Ardhana-rı-śvara, the male side has matted hair and a ﬂow of water is depicted
that reminds one of the descent of the Ganges on Śiva’s head. The non-dual
nature of Śiva and Śakti, central tenet of Tantric philosophy, is vividly portrayed
in this androgynous image.21 Visualizing an image is thus bringing mythical
and philosophical subtexts to the front.
Bringing an image to mind is in itself a ritual. This, however, is a small part
of a broader Tantric practice. When a ritual is centered in an image, it

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

42

Metonymic structure of Tantric images

activates the myth and the cosmology governing that image in the mind of the
practitioner. Whether the ritual is that of bringing an image to mind and
enlivening it or considering the image as a living breathing entity and making
oﬀerings accordingly, what lies beneath is a focused orientation in which
memories are organized in relation to one another and brought to play through
association. Metonymic process is crucial to this ritual of remembering.
The part-whole relationship, a constituent of the metonymic process, is
commonly utilized in both mantra recitation and visualization practices. One
syllable is considered to be the heart, or the central element of the mantra,
and the mantra is its elaborate form. Just as the mantra is replaced by the
image of the deity, so are the deities supplanted by their mantras or man.d.alas.
In visualization, a part of the deity or a syllable of the mantra stands for the
body, the deity, or the entire mantra, and visualization practice brings this
relation to the cognitive domain.
It is also worth noting that mantras are described as embodied. They have a
heart and limbs, tuft and eyes, and are given personality. In this depiction,
one structure, the mantras (A), is mapped onto another, the body (B). This
cross-domain mapping not only gives body-like properties to mantras, but
also mantra-like properties to the body in Tantric discourse.22
Following the principle of contiguity, images in general have parts standing
for the whole. Some identify this part-whole relation with the altogether diﬀerent
category of synecdoche. It is not necessary for us to enter the theoretical discussion here of whether synecdoche should be treated as distinct from
metonym, which is strictly based on contiguity. Suﬃce it to say that this
cognitive process is at play in the rise of Tantric images. For instance, many
Bhairava images depict only his head, representing the full-bodied deity. By
associating subject or consciousness to head and the torso to the body, the
head of the deity stands for Bhairava’s personal identity. In some depictions,
.
Ka-lı- sits atop ﬁve skulls, representing ﬁve deities. The application of the linga
to represent Śiva is common to both Sma-rta and Tantric Hinduism. This is
the same case with yoni standing for the goddess. While part standing for the
whole is vivid in these examples, there is also another layer of meaning to
each of these, the source of creation. Since the divine is attributed to creating
.
the world, linga and yoni as the source of creation reﬂect this divine role. It is
explicit that there is more than one metonymic process at play in image
formation. In another example, only the eyes of the deities are depicted in
various shrines that stand for the deity herself. There is also a two way formation
of metonymy here, as eyes not only stand for the body, they also stand for seeing,
that in turn describes all-witnessing divine eyes. Besides the part-whole type
relation, a common relation in these examples is that of a cause standing for
its eﬀect. When Tantric texts say, the wisdom is in the ‘mouth of a teacher’
(guruvaktra), the mouth metonymically stands for the speech. These metonyms
do not just stand for something but animate what is being described, and so,
the mouth of a teacher is not merely his speech, but even the saliva retains
that special status. The physical parts do not just refer to something else. On

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Metonymic structure of Tantric images

43

the contrary, the corporeality in language makes what is being depicted as
very much ‘lived.’ The ﬁeld of sensation and cognition merge in this embodied
language and transform experience. Any reduction, whether by the process of
making this language disembodied and purely conceptual, or reduction
merely to the body, therefore, fails to do justice to capturing the experience
that is being addressed by bodily language.
Yet another, and a bit complicated process can be at play, when built-in
metonyms are used to construct further metonyms. This process, identiﬁed as
metalepsis, describes the creative process wherein the early appropriation is
taken literally. For example, the sandals of the preceptor or that of the deity
are visualized in the course of meditation or are depicted in shrines. With the
contiguity of the user and an instrument, sandals stand for feet. There is also
a visible similarity between them. And feet stand for the teacher, since
students touch his feet for blessings, and visualize the feet of the guru on the
crown cakra during their meditation. In this complex process of metonymic
expression, sandals stand for the person. It is quite common in kun.d.alinımeditation that the feet of the preceptor are viewed at the center of the crown
cakra. Now, following Tantric theology, Śiva and Śakti are the primordial
teachers. The feet of the preceptor thus stand for the primordial couple as
well. This complex referentiality does not stop there. Since Śiva and Śakti
represent the two aspects of consciousness described in terms of light
(praka-śa) and awareness (vimarśa), the meaning of the feet of the preceptor
extends to these two aspects.23 Ultimately, red and white drops (bindu)
symbolize Śiva and Śakti, and these drops simultaneously refer to the two modes
of consciousness while at the same time signifying the feet of the preceptor.
In this process of relating one symbol to another, multiple meanings accrete,
layered on top of earlier meanings.
In this process of developing symbols, a single deity image stands for more
than one aspect. Metonymically, an agent is often substituted for its action.
The image of Laks.mı- is the symbol of prosperity, Ka-lı- signiﬁes death,
Sarasvatı- symbolizes wisdom, and Durga- stands for heroism. In addition to a
primary designation, Ka-li also stands for time, consciousness, sequence, etc.
Laks.mı- also represents virtue and success, Durga- is also the feminine power,
while Sarasvatı- also signiﬁes speech and sound in general. They each symbolize
the absolute or the self at the same time.
In another metonymic process in developing images, the object represents
the user. The weapons the deity carries, for instance the trident of Śiva, the
bolt of Indra, the staﬀ of Yama, the arrows of Ka-ma, often represent the
deities, and can replace the deities in imagery. Likewise, a sword indicates
Ka-lı- and a book represents Sarasvatı-. While there are some universal traits in
the emergence of this symbolism, for instance a book symbolizing wisdom,
most symbols appear culture-speciﬁc, and a shift in internal categories from
within a culture alters the meaning of the early signs. The bolt of Indra is a
good example. The Vedic god Indra, being the god of rain, had his thunder to
stand for the heavenly power. The bolt of Bhairava does not stand for the

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

44

Metonymic structure of Tantric images

same thing as it did when being carried by Indra. Vajraya-na Buddhism
developed an entire set of symbols, with the bolt signifying the empty nature
(śu-nyata-). Just because these symbols do not have a ﬁxed meaning does not
make them meaningless. We know better that meaning is always in ﬂux.
The presence of the metonymic structure is explicit in examples where
abstract concepts are linked to forms. In this exchange between form and
meaning, metonymy may have played a role in the processes of both encoding
and decoding. In this context, how a book ‘becomes’ a deity, or how particular emotions assume a body, are topics for further discussion. How a text
transforms into a deity in South Asian culture is one clear example for
explaining both the visual culture and the cognitive mechanism at play in
giving rise to the symbolic system. For instance, four Vedas are found in
iconic forms. Prajña-pa-ramita-, a Maha-ya-na Buddhist text, is one of the earliest
texts to transform into a goddess, assuming anthropomorphic form. Even the
text Bhagavadgı-ta- is visualized as a deity. When the texts are viewed as
embodied, the way they are depicted explains the beliefs surrounding the text,
its magical powers, and the central teachings of the text. When Vedas are
visualized, the particular animal or bird faces suggest the peculiar sounds of
articulating the mantras. The example of Prajña-pa-ramita- is also explicit.
From the Prajña-pa-ramita-, a text, Prajña- manifests as an embodied deity
representing wisdom. The image of Prajña- keeps changing, as does her
signiﬁcance among believers. While there is no actual battle for the goddess to
ﬁght, she carries a sword and bolt, signifying elimination of the ego and
ignorance.24 Even though the text and its meaning are established, the image
representing the text remains in ﬂux, giving rise to new meanings. Through
the metonymic process, text and deity inform each other, and the aspirant
borrows meaning from one domain and transfers it to the next with the aid of
the same cognitive mechanism. Often times, this process gives rise to new
meanings and the old ones are layered beneath. Just like one text can be
considered an archive for accreted meanings, so can be an image. As the
imagery evolves, the image of the deity blends with other deity images and
complex forms emerge. As one can see, an understanding of even one of the
most basic among the cognitive mechanisms gives new ways to decipher texts
and images and explore the exchange between literary and visual cultures. In
this transformation from text to image, Prajña- transforms into a piece of art,
and just as Donald (in Turner 2006: 4) suggests while addressing arts in general,
the deity image goes through deliberate reﬁnement and elaboration.25
Metonymic signiﬁcance is present, not just in the case of weapons or gestures
but also for the seat of the deity or the background against which the image is
visualized. Following general metonymic guidelines, the location for a speciﬁc
event represents the event itself. The cremation ground, for instance, represents death. A grove suggests an amorous play. A cave, for instance, suggests
a meditation place or solitude. Since a yogin renounces a city life that stands
for sam
. sara and goes and lives in a cave, a cave thus suggests the rejection of
- ra. A chain of metonymic processes is activated to reach this meaning.
sam
sa
.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Metonymic structure of Tantric images

45

The full moon, a dark night, sunrise, etc., in the same way, allude to speciﬁc
events that occur at these times. Beyond a universal meaning of darkness and
light, sunrise and sunset stand for the speciﬁc rites, or diﬀerent pra-n.ic states in
the yogic body.
Another crucial process of metonymy is the eﬀect suggesting the cause.
When the red eyes of Bhairava are depicted to indicate wrath, the redness in
eyes are the corporeal eﬀects of going through anger. Similarly, the sunken
belly of Bhadraka-lı- indicates her hunger. When Ka-lı- is depicted sitting atop a
corpse, the corpse is representing death metonymically. A complex causeeﬀect relation can be established between a snake, its poison, and the resulting
death; the moon, its nectar, and immortality as its eﬀect; cremation ground,
the act of cremating dead bodies, death itself, and transiency; and so on.
Donald (in Turner 2006: 7) argues that “art is always aimed at a cognitive
outcome.” This certainly is the case with Tantric images, where the

Figure 2.2 Ka-lı-

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Figure 2.3 Śrı- Cakra with letters

Figure 2.4 Bhagavadgı-ta- as a deity

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Metonymic structure of Tantric images

47

practitioner’s gaze encompasses the worldviews and complex relations that
underlie the visualization of images.
Texts and images interplay to create meaning. In this process, textual
polysemy can cause diﬀerent meanings in visualization. For instance, the term
kara means both “hand” and celestial rays.26 Deities, by deﬁnition the luminous ones (deva), generate rays from their body. Tantric texts describe the
peripheral deities as the rays (raśmi) of the central deity in a man.d.ala.27 These
deities can also be represented as the hands of the primary deity, as those who
sit in the periphery are the emanations of the deity at the center. When a deity
is carrying a weapon identiﬁed as śakti, she is also holding “power,” another
meaning of the term. When Śiva carries a triśu-la or trident, he is also holding
three forms of suﬀering under his control. Evident in all these examples is the
role metonymy plays in the processes of both inscribing and deciphering the
images.
Select examples below demonstrate how metonymy is at play in images:
Object

metonymic application

Eye
Tongue
Snake
Hair
Third eye

seeing, realization, gaze
ﬂames, ﬁre
poison, death, the underworld
personal identity, group identity
rage, aversion, and also its reversal: wisdom, allwitnessing gaze
death, the meeting point of life and the afterlife
(relying on the Hindu cremation grounds found
alongside a conﬂuence)
passion, the embodiment of passion
wisdom (because it incinerates karma)
consciousness (dispels ignorance that is darkness)
time (the arrow represents the swiftness of time)
passion (passionate desire gives way to a tender
pain)
wisdom (it cuts through ignorance)
victory (it kills enemies)
speech, mantra, the transmission of the particular
lineage. The ﬁve faces of Śiva stand for the
transmission of ﬁve distinct Tantric lineages
Identity, subject
action
motion, movement: transformation, blessings from
the teacher, the
teacher himself
counting, repetition of mantra, mantra power, siddhis
heart, diﬀerent emotions

Cremation ground

Vermilion powder
Fire
Fire
Arrow
Arrow
Sword
Sword
Mouth

Head
Hand
Feet

Beads
Lotus

48

Metonymic structure of Tantric images

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Lotus

Lotus
Rivers
Vase
Vase
Corpse
Cave
Grove

wisdom. The blooming of a lotus stands for the rise
of the sun (eﬀect for cause); the sun stands for
dispelling darkness; darkness stands for ignorance
vulva
channels in the body, the ﬂow of energy
saturation, fullness, perfection (siddhi)
immortality (as it contains the nectar)
death
secrecy, solitude
amorous play

In these depictions, the objects the deities carry can stand for both the
deities themselves and the particular role assigned for those objects. A trident
can stand for Śiva, and a lotus, the goddess Laks.mı-. These weapons, at the
same time, also convey their particular meaning. Therefore, arrows made of
ﬂowers stand for both eros and the god of eros, Ka-madeva. The image of
Tripura- shown carrying these arrows portrays that the goddess has embraced
Ka-ma, and this is why she is also called Ka-meśvarı-. Instruments stand for
action: the eyes stand for seeing, or a mirror stands for counter-image. The
mirror of Pa-rvatı- thus stands for her nature to mirror Śiva which gives rise to
plurality.
Hardly any other art form can make such a strong case for the hermeneutics
of visual culture as that of Tantric images. These are traditionally deciphered
like texts. However, not all rules that apply to texts apply here, and there are
some salient aspects in deciphering these images that cannot be applied in
reading texts. For instance, metaphoric expression is predominant in texts
while metonymy underlies the assumptions made in developing images and
incorporating them in the practice of visualization.
A cognitive approach to religious symbolism is explanatory in nature. It is
vivid in the above examples that understanding the mechanism of metonymy
allows readers or viewers to gain insights that are hard to acquire thorough
other means. In this sense, the approach is hermeneutic. A literal reading of
Tantric texts and images has remained problematic, and this approach,
demonstrated above, is also contrary to the belief system or the culture that is
being examined. The mainstream hermeneutic approaches to reading Tantric
culture have failed to address the nuanced domains of inscribing and deciphering meaning in images. The argument made here is that the cognitive
approach gives a new direction and ﬁnds meaning beyond the literal.
In summary, for as many ways that metonymic relations can be found in
language, we can demonstrate that many examples from Tantric art. The
metonymic relation of cause and eﬀect is the most explicit and well elucidated.
The case for the relation of creator and what is created is vivid in the
portrayal of Ka-lı- to depict destruction. The case of user and instrument is even
more pronounced, as instruments such as a lute or trident are found replacing
their user, Sarasvatı- or Śiva. The container/contained type of metonymic

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Metonymic structure of Tantric images

49

relation is explicit in the skull cup the deity carries, indicating ambrosia. A
place is depicted to suggest the events that occur in that place, and time is
shown to indicate the particular events recommended for those times. For
example, the cremation ground depicts death, the grove behind Tripurasuggests amorous play, water suggests vitality, and the sunrise or sunset, full
moon or new moon indicate the rituals prescribed for those times. The
metonymic device of using a sign to indicate what is being signiﬁed is vivid in
the use of the particular objects the deities carry. The concrete/abstract relation is more pronounced when we relate images to texts, where the abstract
concepts from the texts are portrayed in images. The case of Prajña- is vivid,
as the abstract concept of wisdom becomes manifest in the form of the deity
herself. Recognizing metonymic structure thus aids in unravelling the most
basic and most common processes that Tantric art utilizes.
Although the focus here has been on images, the metonymic structure does
not apply to only the visualization practice. This is just one among many
cognitive transactions that are culturally framed. Evident in this case study is
that the system of meaning is governed by cultural parameters. Rituals or gift
exchange follow the same metonymic patterns. What is universal in these
culture-speciﬁc meanings is the cognitive mechanism that all cultures use in
creating symbols and myths, and performing rituals and exchanging gifts.
Returning to the study of images, while one image may metonymically suggest
a single concept, it is generally the case that a single deity image embodies
complex meanings. This process is aided by a vibrant exchange between the
textual and visual cultures. Common to these diﬀerent processes is the act of
meaning-making, or a conscious eﬀort to depict something that stands for
something else. Rather than inventing new meaning, cognitive tools assist us
in the hermeneutic eﬀort to uncover how the texts and traditions have encoded
and deciphered cultural symbolism.

Notes
1 This is a brief summary of the Bhairava-nukaran.astava of Ks.emara-ja. For discussion,
see Timalsina 2013a.
2 Ks.emara-ja’s project of interpreting the image of Bhairava in BAS also relates to
interpreting the body. For symbolism in general and for gestures, see Crooke 1919;
Brown 1921; Coomaraswamy 1913–14; Gonda 1969, 1972; Coomaraswamy and
Gopa-lakrishna-yya 1970; Bosch 1960; Saunders 1957, 1960; Ikegami 1971; and
Jones 1983.
3 For a general introduction to religious symbolism, see Wagner 1986; Sperber 1975;
and Toren 1984: 260–68.
4 Donald in Turner 2006: 4.
5 For the scope of metonyms, see Ruwet 1975: 371–88; Blank 1999: 169–91. For
metonymy and cognition, see Blank 1999: 169–91; Croft 1993: 335–70; Croft
2006a: 335–70; Croft 2006b: 317–26; Díez Velasco 2001: 47–63; Dirven 1993: 1–28;
and Dirven 2002: 75–111.
6 For discussion on metonymy, metaphor, and cognition, see Turner and Fauconnier
2000; Barcelona 2000; Radden 2000; Ruiz de Mendoza Ibañez 2000, 2002, 2004;

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

50

Metonymic structure of Tantric images

Gibbs 1994; Croft 1993; Dirven 1993; Lakoﬀ and Turner 1989; and Lakoﬀ 1987.
For the scope of metonymy, see Panther 2006: 147–86; Panther and Radden 1999;
Panther and Thornburg 1999: 337–57; Panther and Thornburg 2003a; Panther and
Thornburg 2003b: 1–20; Papafragau 1996: 169–95; Peirsman and Geeraerts 2006:
269–316; Radden and Kövecses 1999: 17–59; Ruiz de Mendoza and Francisco
1997a: 201–95; Ruiz de Mendoza and Francisco 1998: 197–208; Ruiz de Mendoza
and Francisco 2000: 109–32; and Ruiz de Mendoza and Franciso 2005: 91–120.
7 For deﬁning metaphors, see Croft 1993: 335–70. For the scope of metaphors, see
Aarts and Calbert 1979; Black 1962: 25–47; Lakoﬀ 1993: 202–51; Sacks 1979;
Fauconnier and Turner 2008: 53–66; Fauconnier and Turner 2008: 53–66. For
comparing metonymy and metaphor, see Dirven and Pörings 2003; Feyaerts 2000:
149–69; Goossens 1990: 323–40; Goossens 1995: 159–74; Jakobson 1971 [1956]:
90–96; Song 1997; and Radden 2000: 93–108.
8 Lakoﬀ and Turner 1989: 103. Some scholars have found this position problematic.
For discussion, see Ruiz de Mendoza Ibáñez, F.J. and Pérez Hernández, L. 2001:
321–57.
9 See Croft 2002: 177.
10 Velasco-Sacristan 2010: 64–96.
11 For Indian symbolism in general, see Harsch 1957; Jung 1955; Kirfel 1959a,
1959b; Sharma 1956; and Sperber 1975. For the limits of symbolic interpretation,
see Jarvie 1976.
12 Mantra-bhidha-nakos.a is one such text in mind that extensively deals with Tantric
code language. Maha-ka-lasam
. hita provides an extensive detail of code words and
the published version includes in its appendix their reference. For discussion on
mantra language, see Modi 1932; Bolle 1959; Gonda 1963; Alper 1991; Findley
1991: 15–47; Staal 1991: 48–95; Wheelock 1991: 96–122; Coward 1991: 165–76;
Oberhammer 1991: 204–23; and Padoux 1991: 295–318. For magical language, see
Izutsu 1956.
13 For six-fold meaning of mantras, see Timalsina 2005.
14 viyadı-ka-rasam
. yuktam
. vıtihotrasamanvitam |.
- bı-jam sarva-rthasa-dhakam || Devyatharvaśı-rsa 18.
ardhendulasitam
devya
.
.
.
15 ka-mo yonih. kamala- vajrapa-n.ir guha- hasa- ma-tariśva-bhram indrah. | punar guhasakala mayaya ca purucyais.a viśvamatadividyom
. || Devyatharvaśırs.a 14.
16 For the images of some gestures, see Ajitamaha-tantra, vol. 5, pages 80–97.
17 Some texts outline hundreds of gestures, and others, such as Yoginı-hr.daya describe
the primary gestures.
18 Svacchandatantra, Chapter 15.
19 For a select works on possession, see Smith 2006; and Walsh 1989, 1995.
20 The application of imagination here and elsewhere in this paper is close to kalpanaor bha-vana- in Sanskrit, and the imperatives, such as kaplayet, bha-vayet, etc. For
the signiﬁcance of imagination in the practice of visualization, see Timalsina 2013;
Isabelle Ratie ‘Imagination in Pratyabhijña-’.
21 For the symbolism of the divine feminine in Hindu and Buddhist traditions, see
Dikshitar 1942; Wayman 1962; Shaw 2005; Hawley 1982; Kinsley 1988, 1997; and
Narayanan 1982.
22 For mantras as embodied, see Timalsina 2010. For visualization of the body for its
puriﬁcation, see Flood 2001. For the body as a metaphor, see Flood 2006: 74–76.
23 For discussion on kun.d.alinı-, see Silburn 1988 and Avalon 1974. For the analysis of
the concept of vimarśa, see Skora 2007a, 2007b, 2009.
24 For detail, see Bhattacharyya 1978: 37–67.
25 For instance, the Cambodian image of the Prajña- goddess comes with 11 heads
and 22 arms (Bhattacharyya 1978: 60).
26 For the multiple meanings of kara, see Medinı-kos.a (123.12).
27 For the history of man.d.ala, see Haarh 1958; Pott 1966; Meister 1979; and Staal 1983.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

3

Metaphor, embodiment, and
Tantric images

Deﬁning the categories
Metaphor in tantric discourse
All cultures and languages use metaphors. Contemporary cognitive scientists
have established that metaphoric thinking is the basis of human cognitive
activity. Although we have come to the point where the line between the
literal and metaphoric has been blurred, and the scientiﬁc or objective is no
longer viewed as dissociated from the metaphoric, we have yet to aﬀect the
course of cultural studies. The mainstream cultural studies today primarily
relies on the literal, aims to construct a linear meaning, aspires to read
cultures as a linear progression, and often times, reduces the cultural elements to
socio-political categories. This reductive tendency has its own consequences.
This chapter concerns reading metaphors in Tantric literature. Nothing can
highlight this case better than the study of metaphors in Tantric culture.
Tantric texts rarely use literal language. Their philosophical categories are
metaphoric, their rituals are made in the processes of packing and unpacking
metaphors, and whenever possible, Tantric practitioners choose the metaphoric at the cost of the literal. Their visualization practices, mantras, man.d.alas,
and deity images are all metaphoric, and due to a lack of understanding of the
greater signiﬁcance of metaphoric thinking in Tantric culture, contemporary
studies of Tantra have gravely suﬀered. This chapter aims to only highlight
the need for altering the discourse and emphasizing the importance of metaphoric
language in addressing Tantric culture, both visual and literal.

Metaphor, embodiment, and culture1
Broadly speaking, in the case of metonymy, one entity stands for another,
whereas in the case of metaphors, one entity is viewed as another. Despite this
seeming clarity of deﬁnition, there is nonetheless a signiﬁcant overlap between
metaphor and metonymy. Both are highly pervasive in language and are

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

52

Metaphor, embodiment, and Tantric images

non-literal. Both play a signiﬁcant role in the evolution of language, particularly when the meaning of words shifts over the course of time. With metaphor, we understand some aspects of an entity in a new light, as if that part is
magniﬁed. Metonyms refer to something else, substituting one entity for the
other. Lakoﬀ and Johnson (1980, 6) argue that “metaphor is not just a matter
of language, that is, of mere words,” and claim that “human thought processes
are largely metaphorical.” Metaphors, along these lines, are in our conceptual
system. Therefore when we conceptualize something metaphorically, it is
natural that some aspects are highlighted and the others are automatically
subordinated.
Lakoﬀ and Johnson distinguish among metaphors, placing them in diﬀerent
groups based on their nature. Structural metaphors provide structure to
one concept based on another concept. Orientational metaphors, on the
other hand, orient subjects by spatializing concepts. For instance, we view
being happy in terms of going up. Ontological metaphors address concepts
whereby one part of an entity is picked out as a discrete entity, and when
placed in this category, the metaphor refers to our experiences as entities. One
may, for instance, say, I am a little rusty today. It will be evident in the following
pages that engaging metaphor theory is immensely helpful in revealing the
layers of meaning embedded in Tantric culture, particularly visualization
practices.
Recent studies on metaphor have also pointed out their embodied nature.
Lakoﬀ and Johnson argue that all primary metaphors develop by being
grounded on our embodied experience. Others have even argued that synesthesia
and metaphor are similar cognitive processes.2 It is also being increasingly
accepted that even the most abstract concepts are based on sensory-motor
images. These ﬁndings have pointed out that metaphoric thinking is crucial to
our sensory perception, language comprehension, and reasoning. Having said
this, one should not overlook the scope of culture in the construction of
metaphors.3 Rather than expressing new conceptual categories, metaphors
thus express preexisting concepts that are predominantly shaped by culture.
The inherent tension between whether metaphors are embodied and thus
universal, or whether metaphors are culturally shaped is not diﬃcult to
resolve: for both, the answer is aﬃrmative. Embodied experience and cultural
constructs do not necessarily preclude each other. It will be clear as we proceed
in the following pages that the way we conceptualize our body is vastly
shaped by culture. And, of course, cultural experiences are the embodied
experiences acted out collectively.
It is thus explicit that the use of metonymic and metaphoric thinking is
universally found, albeit the way they are constructed can be determined by
culture. The scope of this chapter is Tantric visual culture. It has been discussed
earlier that images are crucial to this culture and the ritual of visualization, a
central constituent of Tantric practice that relies on creating and manipulating images, including animation. The focus here is to explore the extent to
which metaphoric thinking has shaped this practice and has given rise to

Metaphor, embodiment, and Tantric images

53

images.4 While doing so, this study also demonstrates the extent of embodied
conceptualization in the formation of Tantric cultural constructs.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Metaphor and cultural hermeneutics
There is an apparent tension in deﬁning the scope of this discussion. On
one hand, I am advocating embodiment as central to metaphoric thinking,
while on the other, I am arguing in favor of cultural constructivism and
rejecting universalization. This tension can be resolved by addressing how
metaphors are treated in the home culture, in this case, that of classical
Sanskrit, and argue for a validity of metaphor theory by keeping culture as one
of the factors in determining metaphoric thinking. While an acceptance of the
universality of metaphoric and metonymic thinking is a recent phenomenon,
theorizing metaphors and applying them in discourse is not new. The objective of grounding metaphors in classical Sanskrit culture aims to widen the
scope of this discourse. Engaging Sanskrit esthetic theory for addressing
Tantric visualization also stems from a recognition that cultural presuppositions
and oftentimes the very processes of conceptualization are broadly determined by culture. As Goddard (2004: 1212) points out, we “need to avoid
terminological ethnocentrism in the metalanguage of description and analysis,
and this means, among other things, that the term ‘metaphor’ itself cannot be
taken for granted.” While this makes a strong case for engaging Sanskrit
metaphor theory, it is not possible to entirely address this issue in a single
chapter in the broader context of analyzing visualization. The objective here is
only to suggest some salient features and give some examples to advance the
argument that an exploration of classical Sanskrit culture can enhance our
understanding of non-literal thinking, and as we broadly engage visual culture,
it will be easier to address various cultural metaphors because the ways
metaphors are construed in classical Sanskrit culture are not identical to those
utilized in contemporary Western culture.
While ‘primary meaning’ (abhidha-) has maintained its privileged position
in philosophical discourse, it is not the case that metaphoric expression
remained only within the domain of literature in classical Sanskrit. Both
philosophical and literary texts suggest that the scope of metaphoric language
is much wider than has been acknowledged. To begin with, those philosophers
who considered the ‘power’ (śakti) of language to describe reality by words
expressing universals and not particulars, maintain that particulars are known
through indication (laks.an.a-).5 In order to expand the scope of indication,
Advaita Veda-ntins claim that language cannot directly describe the absolute
and words are capable of only indicating it.6 If we use the term ‘metaphor’ to
describe all that is non-literal, the application of the above position is that
reality can be described only metaphorically, or the ‘thing-in-itself ’ is only
metaphorically known. In other words, language relates to our concepts, and
the reality that has been captured or reﬂected in our concepts is known

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

54

Metaphor, embodiment, and Tantric images

metaphorically. Now the discussion is not restricted to literary language or
language in general, but to our cognitive processes.
Metonymy is primarily addressed in Sanskrit literature when discussing
indication (laks.an.a-). Following the Sa-hityadarpan.a (SD) of Viśvana-tha, there
are eighty varieties of ‘indication.’7 Several of these varieties are unique to
Sanskrit expression, supporting the argument that metaphoric expression is
culturally grounded. The sophistication in addressing indication, as one can
see in SD, helps expand the scope of non-literal language and eventually
address the way we conceptualize reality. This makes a case for engaging
classical Sanskrit philosophical traditions and esthetic theories while addressing
cognitive issues, particularly those related to comprehending language.
A few examples cited in SD to explain indication are:
‘The white runs.’
(‘White’ stands for the white horse.)
.
.
‘Kalinga is courageous.’ (Kalinga, a place, refers to a person who lives there.)
‘Spears enter.’
(‘Spear’ refers to the person carrying the spear.)
‘The prince laughs.’
(The term prince refers to someone with princely
qualities.)
These are examples of diﬀerent varieties of indication, and following SD, each
of these can be used as metonym or metaphor, depending upon context, or
with or without the use of the noun terms. If ‘these spears enter’ is the sentence,
the term ‘spear’ does not refer to the spear-bearers, but describes their qualities,
as being sharp, for instance. When the subject is not given, the same sentence
is used metonymically.
As seen above, the distinction between metonymy and metaphor is porous
and often overlapping. Furthermore, when translated into another language,
the same expression is hard to preserve. One often cited example in Sanskrit
.
for ‘indication’ is ‘a hamlet in the river’ (ganga-ya-m
. ghos.ah.). The Pan.inian
.
suﬃx ni (–yam) can have multiple denominators in English, such as on, by, at,
in, around, and so the English speaker can choose any of these to be precise
and no indication will be required. Another example in Sanskrit is ‘butter is
life’ (a-yur vai ghr.tam
. ). - One needs to ground cultural presupposition that
butter is considered in Ayurveda as nourishing, as our contemporary understanding of ‘fat’ for butter cannot explain this metaphor. In essence, while the
Sanskrit philosophers maintained a diﬀerence between primary and secondary
meanings, they did not limit the scope of secondary meaning to poetic expression
alone.
.
Sanskrit discourse on alanka-ra is complex.8 In support of the claim that
engaging Sanskrit literature can bring to light hitherto unaddressed nuances of
human cognitive mechanisms, and how this is relevant for the contemporary
study of metaphors, I will oﬀer some examples. Generally understood as ﬁgures
.
of speech, alanka-ras play a central role in Sanskrit poetics, and the literary
theories addressing these tropes provide a universal approach to secondary
speech, transcending the parameters of poetic language. Also noteworthy is

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Metaphor, embodiment, and Tantric images

55

that these devices are meticulously deﬁned by classical esthetes, and are
oftentimes understood diﬀerently. We cannot translate the key terms, such as
similarity (sa-dr.śya) or comparison (upama-na) across disciplines, as what these
terms mean in literature is not the same as how they are understood in the
diﬀerent philosophical schools. For instance, similarity (sa-dr.śya) stands as one of
the categories of logic in Mı-ma-m
. sa and comparison (upamana). as one of
the means of comprehension. In poetics, both are considered alanka-ras. The
examples given in the following paragraphs are thus only to initiate a dialogue
for a broader discourse.9
.
To demonstrate how engaging the analysis of alanka-ra can enrich the contemporary discourse of metaphor and cognition, the examples of ‘upama-,’
‘ru-paka’ ‘sama-sokti,’ and ‘artha-naranya-sa,’ will suﬃce. Upama-, in general, is
comparison. Viśvana-tha identiﬁes ﬁfty-four primary varieties of comparison,
while acknowledging its inﬁnite internal variants.10 In the case of ‘comparison,’
Sanskrit esthetes identify the domains of source and target as a-ropita (source
= S) and a-ropya (target = T). In an example, ‘the boy is a lion,’ particularities
such as ﬁerceness, boldness, etc. found in the lion (S) are mapped onto the
boy (T). In the example ‘lotus eyes’ (kamala-nayana-), not only are the shape
and character of the woman’s eyes being praised (T), but also other properties
such as visually pleasing, are borrowed from the lotus (S).
Gerow (1971: 239) translates ru-paka as a literary device having the form of
metaphoric identiﬁcation. He deﬁnes it as “a ﬁgure in which the subject of
comparison is identiﬁed with its object by a speciﬁc process of grammatical
subordination.”11 Following a classical deﬁnition, “in the instances where the
substrate [or the] target (T) of comparison is always colored by the image
of the object with which T is compared with S, that is identiﬁed as ru-paka.”12
If the imagery from the source, e.g., hair, is superimposed on the target, e.g.,
trees, and trees are described as having hair, this will be ru-paka. Ballantyne
and Mitra translate this as metaphor.13 Following SD, this consists of “the
superimposition of a fancied character upon an object where the target has
not been concealed” (SD 10.28ab).
In the case of sama-sokti, “the suggestion of the other situation is subordinated to the requirements of clever characterization …” (Gerow 1971:
317). In this metaphor, the character of one is ascribed to another, based on
action, sex, or attribute.14 Just to show how metaphors can be culturally
grounded, a common example for this metaphor is, “the sun does not serve
the dusk without conquering the entire world.”15 What is lost in translation
is the term for the sun in Sanskrit, ‘ravi’ is masculine in gender, and sandhya-, the
term for dusk, is feminine. In the metaphoric world, the sunset is envisioned as
coupling. The traversing of the sun from its rise to its setting is metaphorically
described as a conquest.
Artha-ntaranya-sa, or introduction of another matter, is “a ﬁgure in which a
proposition or remark is justiﬁed or substantiated by the adjunction of a
relevant moral or rationale; apodixis” (Gerow 1971: 118). In the statement,
“we have landed on the moon: nothing is impossible,” the ﬁrst sentence is

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

56

Metaphor, embodiment, and Tantric images

used to justify the second. This brief discussion is only to make a case for the
.
further study of alanka-ras in light of contemporary metaphor theories. The
objective here is comprehending Tantric visual culture with the aid of literary
theories, metaphor in particular, and so I would like to limit this discussion.
Returning to the contemporary discourse on metaphor, Lakoﬀ explains
that “image-schemas” deﬁne the source domain and these are metaphorically
mapped onto the target domain.16 Following Lakoﬀ (1993: 215), “metaphorical
mappings preserve the cognitive topology (that is, the image schema structure) of the source domain, in a way consistent with the inherent structure of
the target domain.” Corrollaries follow from this deﬁnition. The systematic
mapping can be extended to the construction of new metaphors. An asymmetry between S and T is necessary for metaphors to function. In the above
example, the boy is compared to a lion, and not the reverse. In the world
of linguistic metaphors, the relation between source and target domains is
unidirectional.
Based on the above discussion, it can be concluded that both the classical
Sanskrit exegetes and contemporary metaphor theorists such as Lakoﬀ and
Johnson have sought a wider domain for metonyms and metaphors than
considering them as mere poetic devices. Rather than identifying metonymic
or metaphoric mode of consciousness as a cognitive construct subordinate to
the literal, it may be the case that what we consider ‘real’ or ‘thing-in-itself ’ is
cognized metaphorically. At least, following the Advaitins, the ‘literal’ cannot
describe the ‘thing-in-itself.’17 This is to say that metaphors map the reality
that literal language has failed to describe. If this argument is extended, we
are closer to reality when cognizing metaphorically. Realizing this strength of
metaphors, Lakoﬀ and Johnson (1980: 55) assert that “metaphors can have
the power to deﬁne reality. They do this through a coherent network of
entailments that highlight some features of reality and hide others.” Deviating
from the traditional Western understanding of metaphor, Lakoﬀ and Johnson
have established that our conceptual system itself is largely metaphorical, or
that we largely cognize entities in relation, knowing one thing in terms of
another.18
In Tantric visualization, an aspirant activates both the image and the text
in the mind during practice. Alternatively, the subject plays with the words of
the text describing the deity and its surroundings while bringing the image to
mind. The text, while using metaphors to describe aspects of the deity,
becomes the speech-image with which the practitioner identiﬁes himself.
When an image is brought forth in the mental space, metaphor becomes a
device to bridge the gap between the subjective and the objective.
The following example from a manual for visualization practice demonstrates
the scope of metaphor:
‘Your right eye gives rise to the day, since it is of the nature of the sun.
Your left [eye] creates night, since it is [the moon,] the mistress of the

Metaphor, embodiment, and Tantric images

57

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

night. Your third eye, with the glow of a slightly opened golden lotus,
gives rise to the intermediate time between day and night.’19
What has been suggested in the above example, the transcendence of the
goddess over time, is described metaphorically. The recitation of the text
serves to bring this imagery to the mental space during the course of visualization.
This process of metaphoric thinking is not unique to Tantras though, as one
can see the similar process in popular Hinduism where the deity image is
described.

Ideology, metaphor, and Tantric visualization
One can research poetic fancy, the use of various literary tropes, and the
poetic devices in the Vedas. Scholars have identiﬁed some of the cognitive
mechanisms that are at play in performing Vedic rituals, or rituals in general.20
What this present study emphasizes is the unprecedented transfer of ritual
concepts found in the Vedas and Upanis.ads into subsequent contemplative
practice, where the physical ritual activity is reproduced conceptually. That
the deities themselves became metonyms for abstract concepts is vivid in the
way the Vedic deities such as Agni or Indra are represented in this shifted
cultural paradigm. This is not to say that this metonymic process was absent
in early Vedic imagination, as the deities Vr.tra, Aditi or Us.as all appear
representing abstract concepts. What we see in the Upanis.ads is this process
being more complex, while adding new signiﬁcance to old imagery alongside
the emergence of new sets of concepts. For instance, the early imagery of
Indra that stood for various elements such as valor, protection, glory, order,
etc., or Agni that stood for light and for that matter wisdom, cosmic order,
virtue etc. were reintroduced as stand-ins for particular abstract concepts. In
this new paradigm, early ritual metaphors transform to contemplative metaphors, shifting the previous, signiﬁed meaning to a new signiﬁer. For instance,
ten pra-n.as and the self, collectively making eleven, are equated with eleven
Rudras. Likewise, the twelve Adityas are identiﬁed as the twelve months of a
year, because they carry (a-dada-na-h.) the whole world as they proceed through
time (BAU 3.9.1–5). In this process, metaphors merge into metonymic thinking, with the identiﬁcation of Indra with thunder and the thunder with a
thunderbolt, a weapon of Indra (BAU 3.9.6).
That metaphoric thinking has been crucial in transforming early sets of
symbols to the new ones is vivid in the Upanis.adic example where the cosmos
is compared with the sacriﬁcial horse (BAU 1.1). In this passage, the dawn
is identiﬁed as the head of the horse, the sun his eyes, wind his breath, ﬁre his
mouth, and the year as his soul. In this broad analogy, the heavenly vault
is described as his back, the sphere of the sky is the belly, the horse’s ﬂanks
stand for the earth, and his ribs designate the intermediary space. The seasons
are compared to his limbs, the lunar months and fortnights are his joints, the
days and nights are compared to his legs, the constellations are represented by

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

58

Metaphor, embodiment, and Tantric images

his bones, ether is found in his ﬂesh, sand is the undigested food in his belly,
rivers are his anus, and mountains are the place between his liver and heart.
Herbs and plants are compared to his mane, the rising sun is the front part of
his body, and the setting sun as the hind part below his navel. The horse’s
yawn stands for lightning, his movement represents thunder, his urine corresponds
to rain, and his neighing symbolizes all speech. In this, the early symbolism
(correlation of the body-parts of the sacriﬁcial animal with diﬀerent deities, as
found in the early Bra-hman.a texts) is linked with the new symbolism (the
omnipresence of the Brahman). Transforming early symbols (which were metonymically construed) to the new ones has been possible through the complex
cognitive process that is metaphoric in nature. While early symbolism rests on
rituals, new sets of metaphors are embedded in contemplative practice, and both
of these are rooted on the particular worldviews. Since these are culturally
construed and change over time, it is not possible to decipher the metaphors
without acknowledging the presuppositions intrinsic to the source culture.
The cultural transformation that revolutionized earlier beliefs and practices
and gave rise to new contemplative structures touches its zenith in Tantric
visualization. An historical awareness is thus warranted for unraveling the
conceptual layers that accrete over time.
Lackoﬀ and Johnson (1980: 3) argue that our ordinary conceptual system is
fundamentally metaphoric in nature. Myth making, the transformation of
reality in images, and the projection of additional properties and concealment
of other aspects, all function through metaphoric thinking. Just like a spoken
language, visual metaphors depict inner cognitive structures. This universalization, however, falls short when ignoring the fact that metaphoric thinking
is culturally shaped, and while metaphoric thinking is universal, the ways
metaphors are construed vary with each culture, and without factoring in the
internal cultural presuppositions, the bare knowledge of the structure cannot
assist in deciphering meaning. Consider the image of Ka-lı-, for example. It has
been discussed in the previous chapter how the metonymic process has
played a role in shaping visualization. Metaphoric thinking delineates the link
between two systems: the ritual domain of Tantric visualization and the
Trika, Krama, and Maha-rtha philosophies of Tantras that consider Ka-lı- as
the supreme divinity. In these non-dual philosophies, since consciousness is
universal to all the cognitive processes, it is considered a singular reality and
its pristine form is equated with Ka-lı-. By borrowing the monistic worldview,
the deity is now identiﬁed with consciousness. The imagery of Ka-lı-, in this
paradigm, becomes the eﬀulgent consciousness manifesting in all conceptual
modalities, and the terms used to describe consciousness, such as samvid, or
cid become synonymous with the goddess. Visualization, in this paradigm,
becomes a contemplative act of bringing the imagery to mind while remembering the central tenets of Tantric philosophy. The dark body of the goddess
wearing heads and hands and the cremation ground as her residence, in this
transformed paradigm, becomes symbolic and correlates to constituents of
the Tantric worldview. Finding these correlations, however, rests on relating

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Metaphor, embodiment, and Tantric images

59

Figure 3.1 Guhyaka-lı-

the two systems, and metaphoric thinking plays a crucial role in establishing
links between the diﬀerent domains. A few examples from a text centered
around Ka-lı- that grounds Tantric Krama and Maha-rtha philosophies suﬃce
to support this claim:
1. The text under consideration is Cidgaganacandrika- (CGC) or Moonlight
in the Sky of Consciousness. As the very title suggests, consciousness, just like
the sky, is all-pervasive. At the same time, when consciousness is equated
with Ka-lı-, it also identiﬁes Ka-lı-’s omnipresence. The text metaphorically
identiﬁes itself as moonlight, indicating its soothing nature. What is also
suggested here is the equation of the dark night with Ka-lı- and the author’s
premise to cast some light on her nature. This light does not contradict the
night or Ka-lı- though, as it is not the sunlight.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

60

Metaphor, embodiment, and Tantric images

2. The text correlates the trunk of Gan.eśa with the syllable Om (CGC 1) and
relates the Sanskrit phonemes to the body of Gan.eśa. The text compares
transmigration in the world with wildﬁre and identiﬁes the text with the
rejuvenating waters of the moon (CGC 3). This invokes the Hindu belief
that the moon contains ambrosia, and to highlight its abundance, the
author uses the term ‘abdhi’ or ocean.
3. Some of the metaphors found in CGC that rest on cultural presuppositions include: consciousness is the eyes (CGC 4); heart is the cave
(CGC 5); eyes are the powers; consciousness is the ocean (CGC 7); rays
are the net (CGC 10); the body of Ka-lı- is the sattva gun.a (CGC 16); Ka-lıdepicts tamas (CGC 19); the goddess is the full moon by manifesting her
full form, and she is also the new moon by concealing the world within
herself (CGC 21); Ka-lı- consumes time (CGC 22); the goddess is pure
consciousness (CGC 23); the goddess destroys limitations in the heart of
the aspirant (CGC 25); having awareness of the goddess helps in destroying
other concepts (CGC 26).
As every single verse in the text is replete with metaphors, the objective here is
not to list them all, but to suggest that the textual body cannot be dissociated
from metaphors. Or, what is conveyed by the text is not exclusive of metaphors.
Studying these texts has been problematic, not just that they are metaphorically laden, but also that the dominant trend of contemporary scholarship
sidelines these texts as sophistry and not essential to understanding the concepts.
This textual hermeneutics stems from the understanding that our epistemic
framework is non-metaphoric, or that metaphors are subordinate to recognizing
reality. As a consequence, texts like CGC that shape the practice of visualization
are bracketed from a wider cultural discourse.21
Tantric visualization primarily utilizes orientational metaphors. As Lakoﬀ
and Johnson (1980, 14) explain, these metaphors relate to spatial orientation, such
as up-down, in-out, front-back, deep-shallow, or central and peripheral. Tantric
man.d.alas do not just assemble deities. They use these orientational metaphors
in organization to describe one concept (represented by a deity) in relation to
another concept, demonstrated by its orientation to the central deity – above,
below, or peripheral. In man.d.alas, these deities sit or stand on top of one another.
In the visualization of Siddhilaks.mı-, for instance, Bhairava sits atop a Veta-la
and the goddess sits atop Bhairava. In order to demonstrate the particular
‘family’ of the deity, they are depicted wearing a crown with the mark of a speciﬁc
deity. By riding on Bhairava, the goddess subdues the masculine principle. With
her ﬁve faces, the goddess looks in all directions, demonstrating her omniscience
and omnipresence. Her victory over time and death is portrayed by her riding
Bhairava (representing time) who is sitting atop a Veta-la (depicting death).
Every single image is laden with metaphors and Tantric visualization
encourages the establishment of metaphoric correlates. Visualization, along
these lines, activates the same cognitive process that is operative in metonymic
and metaphoric thinking.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Metaphor, embodiment, and Tantric images

61

Orientational metaphors are more explicit in the depiction of cosmic
planes, where the hellish worlds are shown in the lower part of the body (or
the canvas), and the heavenly planes are depicted above, with the visible
world in the middle. The navel of the body stands for the center. The structure
of ﬁve deities carrying the goddess, common to Maha-vidya- depictions,
describes her transcendence over what the male deities represent. Visualization practices encourage the subjects to be creative in ﬁnding the correlates,
and the worldviews determine the ways these metaphors are deciphered.
Non-dual Tantras utilize these images to describe their ontological and
epistemological categories, and metaphors are the means to establish this
relationship. While the sources are diﬀerent in these metaphors, the target
is the same: the self and the deity, both addressed with the term consciousness
(cid), supersede the lower structures, the body, or the manifest world. Placing
one deity on top of another, thus, functions on one hand to subordinate the
deities depicted in the lower strata, while on the other hand, it serves to
demonstrate the transcendent categories, like Sada-śiva being the seat for Śiva
and Śakti.22
The metaphor of center and periphery, essential to all man.d.alas, depicts
multiple things at the same time: the prominence of the central deity over the
peripheral ones, the centrality of consciousness in the body, the body as an
extension of consciousness, the cosmos as the emanation of pure consciousness, etc. Visualization helps map the diﬀerent domains of text and image and
the cognitive process of metaphor is at its center.
Multiple cognitive processes are simultaneously activated in visualization.
Personiﬁcation, one of the factors of ontological metaphors, is sometimes
found when the weapons of a deity emanate as deities themselves, or when the
limb of a deity manifests as a deity of its own. As has been mentioned earlier,
Varun.a, Us.as or Aditi from the Vedic times embody a sophisticated process
of personiﬁcation. In popular Hinduism, the goddess Durga- carries various
weapons that represent diﬀerent divinities. Just like in the case of a man.d.ala,
the central deity Durga- presides over peripheral deities in this depiction. The
only diﬀerence is that the arms (or the weapons) of Durga- replace the peripheral
deities. In this cognitive process of personiﬁcation, individual deities can be
compared to systems, objects, or metaphors. For instance, Pura-n.ic texts
compare the boar incarnation of Vis.n.u (Vara-ha) with the Vedic sacriﬁce. In
this depiction, the four feet of Vara-ha represent the Vedas; the front legs
portray the act of ritual oﬀering; his mouth depicts the ﬁre pit; his tongue
stands for the ﬁre; his hair portrays the sacred grass darbha; and his eyes
represent day and night.23 Although this example is not from a Tantric text, it
directly explains visualization: this is not about freezing the mind on a single
object, in this case a boar, but to establish a correlation between the diﬀerent
domains.
In the cultural transition from Vedic to Tantric or in the ﬂuid Tantric
culture that varies at diﬀerent times, both the source and target of early
metaphors have changed. Bakhtin’s concept of sedimentation aptly explains

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

62

Metaphor, embodiment, and Tantric images

this process, helping us ground the argument that emergent structures carry
nuances from the early structures, and the analysis of metaphor helps us
fathom the cognitive mechanisms at play. The process of sedimentation, he
argues, follows the chain of communicative situations. Social construction of
reality, in his understanding, rests on sedimentation of particular actions
on one hand and emergence of new actions on the other. The tension between
emergence and sedimentation, or the process of centralization and decentralization, following Bakhtin, underlies reproduction and modiﬁcation of
social realities.24 In our context, both deity image and man.d.ala are constantly evolving, and the way these two structures interact demonstrates the
emergence of new concepts with replacement or sedimentation of earlier
ones. Just as one can see the contemplative philosophies replacing early
metaphors of Vedic rituals, similar processes transform early Kaula rituals
into the new Tantric paradigm grounded on the monistic philosophy of pure
consciousness.
Sanderson observes this shift in meaning from early Ka-pa-lika to the
subsequent Kaula and Krama concepts in the following lines:
“The yoginı-s became the deities of his senses (karan.eśvarı-s), reveling
in his sensation. In intense pleasure, this reveling completely clouds his
internal awareness: he becomes their plaything or victim (paśu). However, when in the same pleasure, the desiring ego is suspended, then
the outer sources of sensation lose their gross otherness. They shine
within cognition as its aesthetic form. The Yoginı-s of senses relish this
oﬀering of “nectar” and gratiﬁed thereby they converge and fuse with
the Kaula’s inner transcendental identity as the Kuleśvara [Lord of
the Cosmic Body], the Bhairava in the radiant “sky” of enlightened
consciousness.”
(Sanderson 1988: 680)
Tantric practice of visualization is not just about bringing images and their
meaning to the practitioner’s mental space, but is also a creative cognitive
process of reﬁning meaning. When asked, Tantric subjects do not decipher the
meaning of the man.d.ala they have been visualizing in identical terms. All,
however, agree that it has meaning and that needs to be deciphered following
the system. My exchange with Tantric practitioners over two decades leads
me to conclude that while meaning is viewed as essential to practice, it is not
considered frozen, or limited to texts or teachers, but subjects are allowed to
be creative in discovering meaning. While retrieval of memory is crucial in
tracing meaning according to the texts, active imagination is required in the
creative act of engaging with meaning. This is where metaphoric thinking
comes to play a role. But this is just one aspect of the story. These images are
activated with overpowering emotions: the experience of love, heroism, anger,
or disgust are just a few among the emotions that subjects cultivate during

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Metaphor, embodiment, and Tantric images

63

visualization. This aspect of visualization where emotion is essential is the
subject of a diﬀerent chapter. I am only pointing out that visualization is a
sophisticated process of engaging memory and imagination while activating
emotions. And, the cognitive domain of this process is predominantly shaped
by metaphors.
In order to demonstrate how Tantric philosophy is primarily shaped by
metaphoric thinking, I will outline a few examples here:
1) The very name for the discipline ispmetaphoric:
ﬃ
The term Tantra from the root tan, with the meaning, ‘to weave’ or
‘to expand’ describes its synthetic and aphoristic nature. Pa-śupatas, who
have accepted Paśupati as their central deity, borrow the deity name from
the ‘animals’ (paśu), and the ‘owner’ (pati). The term ‘naya,’ used to
describe the discipline, is metaphoric, as its literal meaning is ‘path.’ A set
of Tantric texts is called Ya-mala, or a ‘couple.’
2) The highest category in the non-dual Tantras, pure consciousness (sam
. vid),
is portrayed metaphorically:
Following Trika Tantrism, pure consciousness (sam
. vid, cid) is the absolute
reality, equated with Śiva. It is considered autonomous, or endowed with
powers that give rise to the world. All subjective and objective realities are
grounded in this pure consciousness and this is the highest state of yogic
realization. The prominent metaphors for consciousness follow.
Consciousness is ﬂuid.
This is described as the ‘ocean of consciousness’ (cidudadhi). Just like the
ocean has ripples, consciousness manifests as concepts. Just as water does
not have its own inherent form and takes the shape of the container, so
also does conscious assume the form of any object that it encounters. This
ﬂuidity of consciousness is explicitly detailed in philosophical texts such
as Veda-ntaparibha-s.a-, where perception is deﬁned as the ﬂow of consciousness similar to the ﬂow of water, and the transformation of consciousness
into manifold objects is compared to the way water takes the shape of a
ﬁeld with four corners and so on.25
Consciousness is ﬁre.
Relying on this imagery, the highest category is described as ‘the ﬁre of
- consciousness’ (cidagni/sam
. vidagni/jñanagni). Just like consciousness
objectiﬁes, and in that sense consumes, all that exists, so does ﬁre. Just like
ﬁre burns objects, so also does consciousness burn mental constructs.
Consciousness is the void.
This metaphor is described in terms of the ‘sky of consciousness’ (cidgagana/cida-ka-śa).26 Just like empty space permeates all that exists, so does
consciousness. Just like space does not have its own form, so is consciousness
devoid of inherent shape.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

64

Metaphor, embodiment, and Tantric images
These metaphors allow conceptualization of something that lacks its own
intrinsic form. One of the central constituents of the Trika philosophy,
consciousness manifests in all external forms while intrinsically remaining
formless, provides a framework for both constructing and comprehending
the metaphors. The primary ideological metaphor, consciousness is ﬂuid,
helps us understand the application of the terminology such as u-rmi
(wave), and the terms sphuratta- (throbbing), vimarśa (reﬂection or touch.
ing), sanghat.t.a (banging togather), all describe the vibrancy of consciousness. The concepts that consciousness is devoid of forms and it embodies
power to manifest itself through diﬀerent acts are consistent in all these
metaphoric expressions.27

3) The binary metaphors: in the Trika paradigm, the absolute manifests itself
in the form of Śiva and Śakti.28 As an image, it is depicted as Ardhana-rıśvara, where the right half of the body is portrayed as the male and the left
half, female. The primary metaphors used to describe this union of the
binaries in the absolute are:
Śiva is purus.a and Śakti is prakr.ti.
One of the central metaphors in Tantric literature, this is borrowed from
.
the Sa-nkhya system (while changing its meaning).29 The original application
.
of these terms in Sa-nkhya is itself metaphoric: consciousness is identiﬁed
by the masculine term purus.a, and the feminine prakr.ti is used to describe
.
three primordial tendencies of sattva, rajas, and tamas. Sa-nkhya uses this set
metaphorically, borrowing terms from common language to describe the
philosophical categories. Tantras use these terms to replace the early
paradigm and describe an absolute harmony of two principles in the
state of realization. The terms for copulation become the terms to describe
the mystical state, as the liberating experience is considered to be unifying
the opposites.
Śiva is light (praka-śa) and
Śakti is the reﬂexive awareness (vimarśa) [lit. touch].30
These metaphors rest again on a number of presuppositions. First, Śiva is
equated with consciousness, and consciousness is metaphorically mapped
with light, as they both reveal entities. The application of vimarśa to
describe Śakti rests on the philosophy that consciousness is a singular
reality having two modes of illuminating objects and reﬂexively grasping
itself while illuminating. The very term is a metaphoric application, for the
literal use of vimarśa as ‘touch’ is captured in this reﬂexive mode. The
binary description of consciousness as light and reﬂexivity (praka-śa/
vimarśa) explains this very phenomenon of consciousness reaching out to
entities and simultaneously being self-aware. Consciousness, like a lamp,
does not simply illuminate what is out there; it also reveals itself. This

Metaphor, embodiment, and Tantric images

65

mirroring is where the self or awareness rests creatively in each and every
mode of cognition.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Male is white, female is red.
Often times, Śiva is depicted as white and the goddess Pa-rvatı-, red. In man.d.alas, white and red are proportionally distributed. These metaphors stem
from the bodily substances of semen and blood.
4) Triadic metaphors:
The triad of sattva, rajas, and tamas:
One of the most prominent categories to introduce classical Indian philosophy, these three qualities/tendencies (gun.as) are described as: sattva is
white; rajas is red; and tamas is dark. This identiﬁcation of one set of
constructs with the other rests on considering sattva as full of light and
viewing light as white; seeing rajas as dynamic, linking it with motion; and
relating tamas with inertia or darkness. When describing tendencies, these
are not portraying colors. The association of rajas with dynamism corresponds
to the somatic condition of the ﬂow of blood. Tamas suggests the darkness
of the unconscious.
The deities are in a triad.
By borrowing the earlier categories of the gun.as, and assuming that Śakti
is prakr.ti, the set of goddesses (Ka-lı-, Laks.mı-, and Sarasvatı-, or Para-,
Para-para- and Apara-) is viewed in a triad. The system of Trika invokes the
deities in a triad, and also analyzes other categories in a set of three. One of
the early triadic structures is that of pati, paśu and pa-śa that describes the
God, sentient beings, and bondage.
Self-experience is triadic.
Expanding upon the above-described earlier concepts, Trika philosophers
explain self-experience in triadic form. The term for the ﬁrst person pronoun, aham (or I), following Abhinavagupta, is an amalgam of three
phones: a + h + m, where the ﬁrst stands for the initial vowel, the second,
the last of the consonants, and the ﬁnal letter, the nasal sound or the letter
m. The early two in this (a+h) describe the primordial couple, Śiva and
Śakti, and the letter m stands for individuated consciousness. For Abhinava, the term aham becomes a category to describe both the ontological
and epistemic realities.31
5) Process metaphors:
Creation is initiated with pulsation (spanda) in transcendent consciousness.
This metaphor rests on our conceptualization of motion, particularly the
ﬂow of air. This metaphor also describes consciousness as embodied, since
the term spanda also means the pulsation of the heart.32

66

Metaphor, embodiment, and Tantric images

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

‘Creation is the waves (u-rmi) of consciousness.’
This metaphor stems from the earlier one, ‘consciousness is ﬂuid.’
‘Recognition of the absolute is a penetration or entry (sama-veśa).’
This metaphor rests on our common experience of entering home or
an enclosure.
‘The highest esoteric experience is “putting together” (sama-dhi).’
This metaphor rests on our imagination that the mind is some substance that can be put into something and sealed. There are various
other metaphors to describe the process of realizing the absolute:
bodha or awakening, ja-gr.ti or rise/awakening etc.
6) Metaphors to describe the categories:
Time is a spinning wheel. Time is an arrow.
Both these metaphors are used in classical texts, where one views time as
cyclical and the next indicates the ﬂow of time in a single direction. Both
are conceptualized based on our familiarity with something totally diﬀerent
from time.
Water is a circle; ﬁre is a triangle.
There are geometric designs associated with elements, and this rests on our
perception. We see a drop as circular and assume water to be circular. We
see the tip of ﬂames suggesting the form of a triangle.
Water is va; ﬁre is ra.
Tantras also associate phones with elements. This association rests on the
physical eﬀort or the soothing or ﬁery experiences the phonemes give when
articulated. This analogy corresponds to the identiﬁcation made with the
corporeal centers, the phonemes visualized there, and the elements associated
with those centers.
Since an image mirrors the cosmos, time and space are framed within it.
This framing is facilitated by the cognitive process of metaphoric thinking.
Time, generally depicted through action, is spatialized in images. Since
arms depict action which in turn represents time, they metaphorically
stand for temporality. Following the metaphor, “time is space,”33 Ka-lı- sits
atop Maha-ka-la, the Lord of time, who in turn presides over ﬁve deities
that depict the cosmic functions of creation, sustenance, reabsorption,
concealment, and grace. Yet another metaphor plays in the sleeping posture of Sada-śiva or Maha-ka-la, which describes the concept that “death is
sleep.” In the vertical arrangement of deities from the bottom to the top,
deities in the lower rank govern the lower realms and are subject to a
shorter span of time. Tantrics maintain that this vertical structure portrays
a gradual rise of consciousness from the ﬁnite individuality to the divine
consciousness that collectively experiences all as the self. Thus the deities
“ride” on time, and “time is a vehicle.”

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Metaphor, embodiment, and Tantric images

67

In essence, all the philosophical discourse, including the expression of the
esoteric experience, rest on metaphors. As one can see, these metaphors are
culturally grounded and therefore they cannot be reduced to mere bodily
experience or universalized. This, however, is one side of the story. The
embodied aspect of metaphor is widely found in images, particularly in Tantric
visualization.

Body, metaphor, and visualization
The metaphoric body
A central aspect in the relation between culture, language, and metaphoric
thinking is the body and its conﬁgurations that are crucial to not only
describe the categories but also to explain the esoteric experience. To begin
with, the reﬂexive aspect of consciousness is described in terms of ‘touch’
(vimarśa). One’s being in the highest state of absorption is described as
‘penetration’ (vedha). The embodied states of waking and sleeping describe
stages of mystical experience as well as the process of kun.d.alinı-: ja-garan.a or
uttha-na (waking), śayana (sleeping), and so on. Using serpentine imagery to
describe an inactive energy is in itself a metaphor. A frequent metaphor for
yogic absorption is nidra-, or yoganidra-, in the sense that a yogin is unaware of
the phenomenal reality when he is ‘asleep’ in his yogic absorption, or, when
his consciousness is directed inward.
This emphasis on metaphoric expression can sometimes be perplexing. In
the above examples, the yogic absorption is described by both the terms of
‘awakening’ and a ‘yogic slumber.’ Experiencing commonsense reality can be
a metaphoric ‘slumber’ as well as ‘waking’ to everyday experience. Rather
than trying to resolve paradoxes and ﬁnd a single term, these texts celebrate
this complexity.
Body-parts, along the same lines, are used to describe various categories
.
and aspects of the mystical experience. Linga and yoni are two major terms
that depict the primordial couple and describe the esoteric experience that
is compared with sexual union.34 These metaphors, however, do not merely
depict body-parts. While stemming from embodied experience, they stand for
higher categories and a simplistic reduction to corporeality fails to acknowledge
this complexity. For example, eyes stand for the witnessing aspect of the self,
the divine omniscience, healing energy, and so on. Often times, phenomenal
reality and the body are reduced to the eyes, as if perception embodies both
what can be seen and the perceiving subject. Along these lines, corporeal gestures
and the relation of one body to another correspond to various categories.
The heart is the most signiﬁcant among the corporeal metaphors. It
describes multiple things: consciousness resting in itself, the state of realization,
the intrinsically pulsating nature of consciousness that gives rise to phenomenality, and the central mantra of the deity. The esoteric experience of

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

68

Metaphor, embodiment, and Tantric images

self-realization is described as penetrating or entering into the heart. The
absolute reality is described in terms of the heart due to the constantly
pulsating nature of consciousness (citi).
Body is often compared to the cosmos, and particularly to the earth, with
the ﬂesh and the bones metaphorically standing for mountains, and the nerves
with ﬂowing blood compared with rivers. Central glands, in this depiction, are
mapped with ponds, and the head represents Kaila-sa, or the top of the
mountain. Embodied states such as arousal are often compared with ﬁre, and
the victory of Śiva over desire is depicted as the immolation of Ka-ma. This
also metaphorically describes the tension between yogic and sexual energies
(portrayed as heat). This metaphor of heat stems from the corporeal experience
of arousal and the burning sensation of anger.
Creation and the dissolution of the world are described in terms of the
opening (unmes.a) and closing (nimes.a) of the eyelids. The terms carvan.a or
gra-sa, meaning chewing and swallowing, describe the acts of Ka-lı- devouring
the manifest reality into her essential nature of pure consciousness. The
absolute or Śiva is given faces (vaktra) for revealing the texts (Agamas).
Embodiment has thus remained the language to describe the mystical state,
the realization of the self as Śiva.
Contemporary studies on human cognition have much to say on these
issues. Lakoﬀ and Johnson (1999: 555) maintain that metaphors originate
from our sensory-motor experiences.35 The discussion above demonstrates
the centrality of embodied experience in Tantric metaphors. However, not all
metaphors can be reduced to somatic experiences, as a wide variety of metaphors rely on factors such as culture, language, and their worldviews. Constructivists’ arguments are noteworthy in this regard. Proudfoot argues that
feeling or emotion is interpretive of sensation in response to environmental
stimuli and so it is not just the raw data that is grasped in sense-object
contact.36 How we interpret our experience, including our embodied experiences, along these lines, is a matter of interpretation. Metaphors, in this
regard, are not just a mere product of our experience, but rather instrumental
to the way we view ourselves and engage the world, as what we feel is not
always the biochemical reaction occurring within our body; but rather, what
“we are taught to feel in response to the events of our lives.”37 These arguments are congruent with those of the cognitive linguists who maintain that
many of our metaphors integrate bodily and cultural experiences.38 And, this
is also what Lakoﬀ and Johnson (1980: 57) maintain: “every experience
takes place within a vast background of cultural presuppositions … Cultural
assumptions, values, and attitudes are not a conceptual overlay which we may
or may not place upon experience as we choose. It would be more correct to
say that all experience is cultural through and through, that we experience our
‘world’ in such a way that our culture is already present in the very experience
itself.”
In Tantric visualization, the body is used as a template to describe reality.
Categories are mapped within the body, vividly apparent in the ritual of nya-sa

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Metaphor, embodiment, and Tantric images

69

or installation, or in visualizing the body as the site for all the categories. In
this process, some metaphors give rise to others. For instance, the masculine
.
and feminine metaphors function diﬀerently in Sa-nkhya and Tantric systems,
and Tantras derive multiple metaphors based on the binary. In so doing, as
Richard Brown (1977: 125) argues, root metaphors are meta-cognitive schemata
that are taken for granted and thus frame thinking in a wide area of cultural
activity over many years. In this process, a single site, for example the body,
accretes multiple metaphors (sometimes even contradictory ones). Visualization
practices not only apply metaphors, they also decompress them by providing
explanation.
The body of imagination
Merleau-Ponty maintains that our understanding of sensation or the way we
analyze sensation can be compared to the way we understand perception.39
He explains that perception is a behavior aﬀected by the body and not by
consciousness. This contrasts with the position that consciousness constitutes
perception from discrete instances of sensation. This ‘body’ that aﬀects
perception, for him, is not the ﬂesh, or the body as the piece of the physical
world, rather the body as lived, a living body. He distinguishes the objective
body with the “other knowledge which we have of it, in virtue of its always
being with us. And of the fact that we are our body” (PP, 206). He argues, our
“bodily experience forces us to acknowledge an imposition of meaning” (PP,
46). In this context, he describes the other body as a “habitual body” which is
not identical to the ﬂesh. This habitual body rests on our past experiences.
Ichikawa, deriving the seminal concept from Merleau-Ponty, proposes two
categories of perceiving the body: subject body and object body.40 In both
these descriptions, our experience of the body-self rests on our earlier experiences, and what we consider as our body is not just the ﬂesh but a system of
possibilities. These insights from a phenomenological analysis of the body are
helpful in unpacking some of the metaphors in Tantric texts and visualization
practices.
The act of visualization constitutes the habitual body. The subjects, by
constantly viewing their body in a particular way, train their consciousness to
respond to certain stimuli accordingly. Neuroplasticity can explain the somatic
aspect of some of these mechanisms. The eﬀect of visualization among
the practicing subjects can be compared with the roles that culture and language
play in constituting collective identity and social behavior. The diﬀerence is,
subjects, while constructing a new identity (involving their body-self), often
deconstruct cultural presuppositions, resulting in an open space within which
consciousness follows new habit patterns, or experiences the absence of such
patterns. Since there is a primacy of imagination in this process of reconstructing or deconstructing the body, I am identifying this as the body of
imagination.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

70

Metaphor, embodiment, and Tantric images

The imagery that is frequently repeated in Tantric visualization involves the
body as identical to the cosmos or as the distilled mass of consciousness.
What the subject experiences through this practice is not merely the ‘body as
ﬂesh.’ Just like the bodily identity in dreams, meditating subjects can manipulate their bodily awareness. Subjects, accordingly, can identify themselves
with something that is not given in the ﬂesh. The argument that the subject’s
awareness of himself is dynamic can be exempliﬁed in varied forms of
possession (sama-veśa or a-veśa), where the subject with a total control over his
induced altered state describes his self-experience while maintaining an
altered personality. These instances also highlight that the subject’s awareness
of himself is constructed in relation to his surroundings. The way one subject
identiﬁes himself or feels the extension of his ‘self ’ in the other, varies in
relation to the other subject’s response. One can consider oneself representing
the entire group or a nation. Tantrics utilize this ﬂuidity in personal experience and claim that self-experience can be transformed to the Śiva-experience
that embodies the totality. This transformation rests both on creative imagination and the cognitive process of metaphoric thinking. Accordingly, the
transparency and plasticity imposed on the body-self does not arise from the
ﬂesh itself but from the imagined body. This visualized body nonetheless
aﬀects its surroundings, shaping bodily awareness which cannot be limited to
the ﬂesh alone. In this sense, the visualized body resembles the habitual body
of Merleau-Ponty, as through everyday meditation, the yogin constructs new
habit patterns that reorient his sensation and perception, including his
experience of the body.41
Now the issue is, how does metaphoric thinking play a role in constituting
the visualized or imagined body? A few core practices in Tantric visualization
make this explicit:
1) The ritual of ‘purifying the elements’ (bhu-taśuddhi). In this visualization
process, subjects envision in diﬀerent centers within their body the ﬁve
elements, and with articulation of certain syllables, they purify these elements.
The process may include distillation of the gross elements to the subtle,
and re-manifestation of the gross elements from the subtle. So the syllables
la, va, ra, ya, and ha, are viewed as the syllables to represent earth, water,
ﬁre, air, and the sky, and starting from earth, the viewer imagines his body
transforming to more and more subtle elements, eventually to the sky. He
re-maps the body by externalizing it from the sky to earth. The concept of
‘cleaning’ is metaphoric, as it is borrowed from physical cleanliness.
The substitution of the elements with the phonemes rests on ideological
metaphors.42
2) In one practice, certain syllables are visualized in the toe that ignites ﬁre
(of course, mentally). This ﬁre engulfs the body. The subject than views a
regeneration of the body, with the ﬂow of ‘elixir’ (another visualization).
Borrowed from actual cremation rituals, this ‘mental ﬁre’ has the same

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Metaphor, embodiment, and Tantric images

71

eﬀect, albeit to the visualized body. The ﬁre is described as ‘the ﬁre of time
and death’ (ka-la-gni).
3) The practice of nya-sa or ‘installation’ relates to visualizing diﬀerent syllables and mantras in diﬀerent corporeal limbs. In this re-mapping of the
body, the subject views his body as comprised of ﬁfty Sanskrit phonemes,
certain syllables from the mantras being articulated, diﬀerent mantras of
the system, diﬀerent deities in a man.d.ala, and so on. In these complex
practices, all the Tantric categories, geographic planes, cosmic bodies of
the planets and lunar mansions, etc. are mentally ‘installed’ or envisioned
within the body. In so doing, the practitioner is creating a visualized body.
In these practices, corporeality is a metaphor to depict elements and to
deﬁne self-experience. The body, in this visualization, transforms into a
man.d.ala, a geometric design, allowing the subject to identify his body with
what the mand.ala represents.
The visualized body, while resting on imagination, is not totally dissociated
from the phenomenal body. The sensations of burning and soothing, for
instance, are borrowed from the corporeal experience of encountering ﬁre and
water. The colors red and dark are associated with arousal and anger. The
depiction of the goddess Tripura- as ‘The Mistress of Passion’ (Ka-meśvarı-) or
the identiﬁcation of Ka-lı- as a ferocious dark goddess rests on various metaphors borrowed from embodied experiences. Since we feel heat in the acute
state of anger, the deities of the ‘wrath’ (krodha) family are visualized within a
circle of ﬁre. There is also a ﬁery element in sexual arousal. Śiva emits the ﬁre
of rage burning down Ka-ma, the god of desire. The play of metaphors in two
types of ﬁre and the subordination of passion with anger is explicit in this
narrative. Visual signals of anger, such as bulging eyes and a wide mouth
(Forceville 2005: 75–76), are consistently shown in the depiction of Bhairava.
The deities that represent tamas or moha (delusion) carry a cup ﬁlled with
liquor and display the somatic experience of being drunk. Loss of bodily
awareness is also vivid in their nudity. Along the same lines, various deities
are either depicted with animal faces or are riding particular animals. Since
speciﬁc emotions are linked with certain animals or birds, the non-human
ﬁgures depicted in a man.d.ala are equally crucial in deciphering an image.
The hand gestures, displayed during the Tantric practice, is one of the most
complex examples of borrowing symbolism from diﬀerent domains. While
some gestures are simple to understand: such as the gesture of ‘cow’ (dhenu)
with two palms and ﬁngers depicting cow’s udder, or the Mount Meru
gesture, with ﬁngers suggesting the mountain peaks, most gestures rest on the
Tantric understanding of the body, of the channels and the association of
diﬀerent ﬁngers with diﬀerent elements, and so on. The gestures of boons
(vara), protection (abhaya), or displaying a threat (tarjanı-) rest on universal
physical responses. Others display certain aspects of what is being represented,
.
such as the gestures of yoni, trident, or linga. Most, however, are meaningful

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

72

Metaphor, embodiment, and Tantric images

only within the speciﬁc Tantric system and are used both metonymically and
metaphorically.
The description of gestures found in texts such as Cakrasam
. vara (CS) and
Yoginı-hr.daya (YH) clearly articulate the diﬀerences between somatic and
cultural meanings. The hand gestures for hunger, thirst, etc. as found in CS
(20.2–13) are rooted on somatic responses and can be universalized. Speciﬁc
conﬁgurations such as yoni are based on the correspondence of particular
ﬁngers with particular energies, and this relation is entirely culture-sensitive,
as the meaning derived cannot be universalized. Following YH, two right and
left hands correspond to Śiva and Śakti and the four energies associated with
Śiva – Va-ma-, Jyes.t.ha-, Raudrı-, Ambika- – are identiﬁed with four right-hand
ﬁngers, and the four energies of desire (iccha-), cognition (jña-na), action (kriya-),
and the resting mode (śa-nta-), correspond to the goddess and are linked with the
left-hand ﬁngers.43 These two masculine and feminine energies are also linked with
the two letters, |a| and |h|, representing the vowels and consonants. Accordingly,
these two letters also describe self-awareness or aham, in addition to being an
acronym for the ﬁrst vowel and the last consonant of the Sanskrit syllables
that collectively describe the totality of phonemes as well as the world.44 In
the case of the particular gestures described above, while the inscription of these
gestures, or their prescription in rituals come ﬁrst in the Nitya-s.od.aśika-rn.ava,
YH focuses on unpacking their signiﬁcance. Construction of speciﬁc language
meaningful only in a certain ritual context and unpacking that meaning are
thus crucial to Tantric visualization. This system of creating signs and
assigning meaning rests on the cognitive process of metaphoric thinking.
Tantric practice, in this light, is a process of engineering our bodily experience.
Complex cultural and philosophical metaphors are at play in articulating
particular emotions, conveying certain concepts, or ‘engaging’ in dialogue
with the deity which rests primarily in the imaginative domain. Not only does
this practice remap the habitual body, it also helps reshape somatic experiences.
The body, in these practices, becomes the ﬁeld of meaning, and stemming
from the basic corporeal states, the visualized body expands the scope of
somatic experience.

Conclusion
The above discussion supports the conclusion that culture plays a central role
in metaphoric thinking. Language, as discussed earlier, does not just represent
reality and convey experience, it also constitutes reality and shapes our
experience. Due to this greater role given to language and culture, ideological
metaphors are essential in visualization practices. Not only are the worldviews
mapped in visualization, these also shape metaphoric thinking. This makes
cultural awareness crucial to understanding culturally grounded metaphors that
arise from our concepts.45 For instance, bitter opinion or digest the ideas,
come from the conceptual metaphor, ideas are food.46 Fauconnier and Turner
point out that “conceptual products are never the result of a single mapping”

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Metaphor, embodiment, and Tantric images

73

and that “cultures build networks over [a] long period of time that get transmitted over generations” (Gibbs 2008: 53). This is why, while metaphoric
thinking is universal, the way metaphors are constructed and expressed are
embedded within the culture. The brief discussion found above of classical
.
Sanskrit alanka-ra theory points to the same conclusion. These conclusions,
however, do not contradict the fundamental position of Lakoﬀ and Johnson
that metaphoric thinking is shaped by our embodied experience and the cognitive
process is itself metaphoric.
The universality of metaphors is explicit when examining philosophical
texts that convey their categories through metaphoric language. While some
of these metaphors are easy to decipher and rooted on our embodied experiences, the sophisticated Tantric visualization practices are hard to decipher
without an awareness of Tantric philosophy. Also crucial is the role that
emotions play in constituting reality and metaphoric thinking. Tantric visualization is one example of how the distinctive cognitive processes of recollection, attention, imagination, and emotional thinking are channeled through a
single stream of consciousness. Through this, practitioners constitute a separate
body, the body of imagination. This imagined body functions just as MerleauPonty proposes for the role of the habitual body, and as a consequence,
embodied experiences become reshaped. In other words, not just what we
perceive but also what we experience relies on cultural input, and metaphors
both map and shape our experiences.
The above discussion places both consciousness and the body in the cultural
platform. Meaning, as has been argued earlier, is sedimented (as Bakhtin would
say), and tracing metaphors that describe concepts is one certain way to
identify the earlier concepts that have been reframed in the shifting cultural
discourse. Often times, apparently literal texts need to be interpreted metaphorically. This is just one example of how meaning is sedimented. The literal
becomes metaphorical; multiple metaphors cluster together, giving rise to new
concepts through conceptual integration; and new metaphors evolve or new
meanings are discovered for the same metaphors. These arguments are congruent
with those of Velasco-Sacristán (2010: 64–96), who argues that ideological
metaphors demonstrate the conceptual interaction between metaphor and
metonymy. These processes are essential to transform the subject’s experience,
as demonstrated in constituting the mantra-body, or the body created through
visualization by installing various mantras in diﬀerent limbs of the body.
Fauconnier and Turner (2000) note that, although metaphor invokes both
the source and target domain, it does not describe either of them. Although
literal analysis proves to be very fruitful in examining conceptual metaphors,
composite metaphors and metaphor + metonymic expressions cannot be literally
explained. The Upanis.adic example where the ritual sacriﬁce is transformed
into contemplative practice, or the visualization of deity images, all rest on a
composite process with a greater exchange of metonymy and metaphors.
These arguments also relate to proprioception, our perception of our own
embodiment. Our perception of our own body is not ﬁxed, and the way we

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

74

Metaphor, embodiment, and Tantric images

experience our embodied states can be determined by varied factors. What
about our altered self-experience, or our habitual body that is based on previous experiences? These questions suggest the direction for further studies in
human cognition primarily in the cultural context, and the need for engaging
Tantric practices in a wider discourse on human cognition.
Experiences are lived, with the body at the center of our perception.
This centrality of experience, however, is not just to surrender to the body and
its instincts, as the subject’s freedom is vivid in emotionally grasping objects,
metaphorically shifting meaning from one to another, or transforming one’s subjective experience or one’s embodied experiences. Visualization practices make a
case for a ﬂuidity among our experience, perception of our surroundings, and
our own embodiment. In this sense, I can agree with Ricour (1977) in his
contention that truth is inseparable from the expression of lived experience.
Metaphoric expression, in this light, is not a mere substitution for a literal
one; instead, it is the unfolding of an aspect of experience as it is processed in
cognition.
The role imagination plays in constituting reality can be found, not just in
fancies or dreams, but in every perceptual mode. In the absence of imagination,
creativity as intrinsic to consciousness would be sidelined. Our experiences are
made rich or complete through imagination, and the power of imagination is
exploited in visualization techniques that direct subjects to not just creatively
imagine something (A) as something else (B), but also shift subjective experiences by altering personal experience (X) to the divine one (Y). The cognitive
process of metaphoric thinking is essential in this transaction with meaning
imported from one domain to the other.
It is through this power of imagination, or the power of creativity, that the
Tantric subject constitutes new experiences aﬀecting not only his environment
but also his own body. Visualization is a particularly complicated cognitive
process that rests on multiple faculties of perception, memory, imagination,
and so on. When actively perceiving man.d.alas, the practitioner visualizes the
deities seated in diﬀerent parts of his body, with their corresponding mantras
being invoked. This rests on memorization, as what is recalled in this process
are the passages that have been memorized earlier. This practice can also
evoke myths and creative animation of the deity image that involves mental
oﬀering to the deity. Since the cognitive process is complex, multiple sources
are activated at the same time, projecting meaning to a single target. As a
consequence, the subject’s visualization transforms to, or is felt as, direct
experience, with subjects identifying this experience as ‘a direct encounter’
(sa-ks.a-tka-ra). Since multiple sources are represented with diﬀerent meanings at
the same time, visualized images in this process become a ‘multimodal metaphor’
where “target, source, and/or mappable features are represented or suggested
by at least two diﬀerent sign systems” (Gibbs 2008: 463). Just as metaphors
compress multiple domains, visualization techniques compress multiple concepts
in a single domain. The next section addresses this issue.

Metaphor, embodiment, and Tantric images

75

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Notes
1 For conceptual metaphor and culture, see Barcelona 2000b: 31–58; Emanatian
1999: 205–18; Holland and Quinn 1987; Kövecses 1999: 167–88; Kövecses 2002,
2005, 2006; Quinn 1991: 56–93. For a general discussion on metaphor and meaning,
see Johnson 1981; Ricour 1977; and Sapir 1977. For introduction to the Indian
theory of meaning, see Kunjuni Raja 1969. On metonomy and metaphor in Sanskrit
poetics, see also Gerow 2013: 324–31.
2 For discussions, see Slingerland 2008: 156–62.
3 For discussion, see Quinn 1991.
4 For studies on image and metaphor, see see Miller 1979: 202–50; Forceville 2002:
1–14; Forceville 2006: 379–402; Fuertes-Olivera et al. 2006: 347–78.
5 For instance, Dharmara-ja gives an alternative position regarding the expressive
power of language as follows: athava- vyakter laks.an.aya-vagamah. | yatha- nı-lo ghat.a
ity atra nı-laśabdasya nı-lagun.aviśis.t.e laks.an.a- tatha- ja-tiva-cakasya tadviśis.t.e laks.an.a- |
Veda-ntaparibha-s.a- (Agamapariccheda), page 105, line 8-page 106, line 2.
6 For the use of laks.an.a-, see Pañcaprakriya- of Sarvajña-tman. For discussions, see
Kocmarek 1985.
7 This division rests on eight varieties of ru-d.ha and thirty-two varieties of result
(phala), each of which is further divided into two, based on whether the word or
sentence meaning predominates. See SD, 35–53.
.
8 For treatment on alanka-ras, see Gonda 1939; Raghavan 1962; Gerow 1971; and
Warder 1972.
9 For similarity and metaphor, see Ortony 1979b: 186–201.
10 SD, Ch. 10, verses 22–26 and the auto-commentary thereon.
11 For the varieties of ru-paka, see Gerow 1971: 239–59.
12 yatropama-nacitren.a sarvatha-py uparajyate | upameyamayı- bhittis tatra ru-pakam
is.yate || Candra-loka 5.18. There are generally eight variants of ru-paka listed in
Sanskrit poetics.
13 See Ballantine and Mitra, page 363.
14 Jayadeva deﬁnes sama-sokti as: sama-soktih. parisphu-rtih. prastute’prastutasya cet |
ayam aindrı-mukham
. paśya raktaś cumbati candramah. || Candraloka 5.62. For
discussion, see Sahityadarpan.a 10.56.
- bhajate ravih | cited in the auto-commentary
15 ana-kramya jagat sarvam
. na sandhyam
.
.
upon SD 10.56.
16 Lakoﬀ 1993.
17 This relates to the limitation of language in describing reality. Advaitins prefer the
use of negation, and so do the Ma-dhyamikas, due to the inability of language to
describe reality. Even the discourse through negation is nonetheless a description
though, the metaphoric one. When explaining sentences such as ‘you are that’ (tat
tvam asi), Advaitins utilize implication, as the literal could not be the intended
meaning. Advaitins also reject that being (sat), consciousness (cid) or bliss (a-nanda)
can describe the Brahman in reality, arguing that these terms are used only to
negate their opposites. This has led to the wrong conclusion for many though,
maintaining that language fails to describe the truth. The case is that language has
transcended its literal scope and been metaphoric when describing reality.
18 Lakoﬀ and Johnson 1980: 3.
19 Saundaryalaharı-, verse 48.
20 For the metaphoric language in the Vedas, see Bergaigne 1935–36; Bloomﬁeld
1919; Shastri 1948; Johnson 1976, 1980; and Velankar 1938, 1940, 1963, 1969.
21 While the text explored here is in Sanskrit, even the vernacular Tantric and Siddha
literature is equally metaphoric. For a select study of Tantric poetry, see Jackson
2004; Bagchi 1934, 1935, 1938; Guenther 1969, 1993; Jackson 1992; Bailly 1987;
Dimock 1966; and Urban 2001.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

76

Metaphor, embodiment, and Tantric images

22 This structure of seats is quite common among Maha-vidya- deities or Amna-ya
deities. Tripurasundarı, for instance, is visualized seated on top of ﬁve pretas where
the ﬁfth one constitutes Sada-śiva. Guhyaka-lı- or some other deities in the Nothern
transmission are depicted standing atop Maha-ka-la who in turn is seated atop
Sada-śiva.
23 Harivam
. śa 3.34–41. Cited in Daniélou 1964: 76.
24 Bakhtin 1981: 272. See also Auer and Pfander 2011.
25 For the classical treatment on this concept, see Veda-ntaparibha-s.a-, Pratyaks.a section.
For discussion, see Gupta 1995. For the metaphor of consciousness as oceanic, see
Masson 1980.
26 There is even one title of a text, Cidgaganacandrika- that exploits this metaphor.
27 The doctrine of spanda rests on this metaphor of the absolute or pure consciousness pulsating. The most systematic treatment of the concept of spanda can be
found in the Spandaka-rika-.
28 For metaphors in the myths of Śiva, see O’Flaherty 1973, 1981.
.
29 For a Sa-nkhya treatment of purus.a and prakr.ti, see Larson 1969. For the additional
.
.
.
.
works on Sa-nkhya besides the masterpiece Sa-nkhyaka-rika-, see Sa-nkhyasangraha.
For a historical analysis, see Śastrı 1979.
30 Skora 2007a, 2007b, 2009.
31 See Para-trı-śika-vivaran.a for Abhinava’s treatment on aham. For discussions, see
Dupuche 2001.
32 For the metaphor of heart in Tantras, see Müller-Ortega 1987.
33 For the metaphor, “time is space,” see Fauconnier and Turner in Gibbs 2008: 53–66.
34 For the metaphoric and metonymic application of sex, see Davidson 2002,
2003; Faure 1998; Shaw 1995; Urban 2003, 2006; Wedemeyer 2002, 2012; and
White 2006.
35 For select studies on metaphor and cognition, see Fauconnier 1985; Gibbs 1987:
31–48; and Wilson and Sperber 1988: 133–53.
36 Proudfoot 1987.
37 Cooey 1994: 47.
38 For select references, see Lakoﬀ and Johnson 1980; Lakoﬀ and Turner 1989;
Johnson 1987; Gibbs 2004; and Lakoﬀ 1987. This is congruent with the position of
Yu, that “conceptual metaphors emerge from the interaction between body and
culture” (Gibbs 2008: 247).
39 For discussion, see Merleau-Ponty 1979.
40 For discussion, see Nagatomo 1992: 3–28.
41 For discussion, see Igarashi et al. 2007: 190–208.
42 For the ritual of bhu-ta-śuddhi, see Flood 2001.
43 For interpretation of the gestures in Śrı-vidya- tradition, see Yoginı-hr.daya 1.57–71.
44 For the association of these energies with the two letters ‘a’ and ‘h,’ see
Tantra-loka, Chapter 3; and the R.juvimarśinı- and Artharatna-valı- commentaries
on Nitya-s.od.aśika-rn.ava 1.12.
45 For discussion, see Kövecses 2005; Shore 1996; and Gibbs and Steen 1999.
46 For discussion on conceptual metaphors, see Forceville 2005.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Section 3

Image compression
and decompression

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

This page intentionally left blank

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

4

Blended images in Tantric visualization

Cognitive framework
The scope of this chapter is an exploration of Tantric images in light of the
cognitive theory of ‘conceptual blending.’1 After brieﬂy introducing the key
concepts and technical terms, I will introduce three sets of Tantric images
(Yoginı-s,2 Kubjika-,3 and Siddhalaks.mı-4) and initiate the discussion. This
analysis does not apply only for reading the examples oﬀered here. The Buddhist
Tantras, for instance, utilize the same mechanism of conceptual integration in
the construction of images. In this chapter, I have limited analysis only to
examples from the Śaiva Śa-kta traditions in order to not overshadow the
arguments. The main argument here is that the cognitive approach can inform
the analysis of opaque and complex images of Tantric deities with their many
heads, arms, and weapons that often puzzle viewers. This approach is not
intended to reduce these images to a mere cognitive mechanism, but to
explore new ways to engage the visual culture.
Inspired by Arthur Koestler (1964), Fauconnier and Turner have advanced
the theory of ‘conceptual blending’ as a general theory of cognition. Following
the proponents of this theory, conceptual blending is an evolutionary trait and
is common to our everyday language, art, rituals, myths, and various other
human transactions. Soon after its introduction, this theory inspired many
scholars, and in addition to a number of dissertations, it has been applied in
diverse areas such as semiotics, education, language, culture, and emotion
studies.5 This essay is not about evaluating the cognitive theory. Instead, the
objective here is to explore how this theory that is still in the making can be applied
to read the complex visual culture of Tantras where the deities have multiple hands
and heads. Deities in poly-anthropomorphic forms from diverse cultures have
perplexed viewers and have often been subject to misunderstanding. This
application of cognitive blending rests on the underlying assumption that cognitive mechanisms play a role in the development of complex imagery.
Although Fauconnier and Turner have explored the role of the cognitive
mechanism of integration in analyzing human creativity, the application of
this theory to understand the opaque Tantric culture is original to this
author.6 While images from any culture demonstrate various cognitive

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

80

Blended images in Tantric visualization

mechanisms at play, engaging Tantric images in particular introduces a diﬀerent
approach to the existing trends of historical and comparative studies. Blending
diﬀerent images from various inputs can be found in any culture and is visible
in earliest arts of humankind.7 That being said, Tantric images provide
the viewer with the opportunity to decompress various traits of any given
image from within the Tantric system, and analyzing Tantric images in particular allows us to explore the ways contemplative practices are enhanced by
their visualization techniques.8 The practice of visualization vividly describes
this process. The central deity in the man.d.ala is ﬁrst viewed as emanating the
circles of deities surrounding her and constituting the man.d.ala, and then
visualized as returning back to the primordial form with the central deity
reabsorbing the emanations. I will demonstrate with three examples how the
cognitive model of conceptual blending applies in analyzing Tantric images.
The deity images explored here, those of Yoginı-, Kubjika-, and Siddhalaks.mı-,
manifest in clusters, and the manuals detail how the images of these deities
integrate various other deities as their complex forms evolve. Conceptual
blending thus helps us theorize one of the most perplexing issues of Tantric
visual culture.
Psychologists have established that conceptually generated images and
the perception of real objects are similar in multiple ways. Various studies
have demonstrated that regardless of the way we rotate mental imagery,
assume distance within an image, or make decisions regarding its shape, we
nonetheless respond to mental imagery the same way that we respond to
external stimuli. An essential concept key to advancing this study of Tantric
images is the paradigm of the cognitive map, which is a mental representation
of the external surroundings. Although this map resembles reality, the mind’s
task of selection and projection is already at play in remembering those maps.
It is common to have verbal description elicit mental images, and those
images lead to verbal description. It will soon be clear in this discussion that
these Tantric images function as cognitive maps to suggest speciﬁc thoughts
to the practitioner in the course of meditation.
Cognitive scientists have identiﬁed that integration of various inputs is at
the core of conceptualization. It is not only humans but also pigeons that are
seen to have concepts. In various experiments, pigeons have demonstrated the
ability to recognize the pictures of ﬁsh, landscapes, or even the distorted
images of the cartoon character Charlie Brown.9 Fauconnier and Turner
(2002: 6–15) credit the evolutionary cognitive mechanism of conceptual
blending for our ability to identify entities experienced in two diﬀerent times
and places. Imagination plays a vital role in this process. These three skills of
drawing a cognitive map, establishing identity, and imagination, following the
theory of conceptual blending, integrate two diﬀerent physical spaces or
times, multiple causes and eﬀects, and/or other vital relations. The basic idea
is that common elements inherent to diﬀerent inputs integrate in one image,
and what is represented refers to many diﬀerent particulars. Limned meanings
from diﬀerent inputs are compressed in this process that gives rise to a single

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Blended images in Tantric visualization

81

image. The emergent structure shares commonalities, and what arises as a
new structure borrows nuances from its diﬀerent sources. Turner describes this
process of compression in the example of the Hall of Bulls in the Lascaux
Caves (Turner 2006: 99) and makes the case that the integration of diﬀerent
cognitive modalities has been occurring in art since the Upper Paleolithic era.
One of the particular abilities of the mind is its capacity to integrate its contents
over time.10 Addressing this cognitive phenomenon, Turner (2006: 93–113)
details the process of conceptual integration in art.11 As will be explicit,
reading Tantric images in light of this framework allows us to unravel
hitherto unknown dimensions of opaque forms.
Students are sometimes given the assignment to imagine what they would
do if they were the president. In this hypothetical scenario, the child has to
see in his mind his present self (auto-noesis) and project himself as the president
in his mental space. Fauconnier and Turner deﬁne mental space as “small
conceptual packets constructed as we think and talk, for the purposes of local
understanding and action.”12 In conceptual integration, we fuse diﬀerent
mental spaces. In the example of the child imagining himself as the president,
two diﬀerent inputs are mentally mapped: 1) the child’s subjective state mirrored
in his mental space, and 2) the president (or what it represents to the child).
These are called input spaces. What applies in conceptual blending is a crossspace mapping, where diﬀerent inputs are blended into one. In this example,
the child imagines himself sitting in the Oval Oﬃce. A generic space maps
onto each of the inputs (human agency for instance in the above example).
Following the theory of conceptual integration, the ‘blend’ is the fourth mental
space wherein two diﬀerent spaces are mapped in the generic space (third
space), and an emergent structure rises in the mind, one that was not existent
in the inputs. In this way, when our mind integrates various concepts, we are
establishing new mental spaces, analyzing similarities and diﬀerences across
spaces, projecting particular aspects from diﬀerent inputs to a blend, and
carrying out various operations in the blend, constantly giving rise to new
structures.
What is consistent in conceptual integration is the compression of vital
relations. In the example of the child’s assignment, what the child would do if
he were the president, he identiﬁes himself as the president in the blended
space. Situational change is vital in this imagined presidency. In addition to
change, something else keeps diﬀerent inputs bound together, and that is
the identity or the shared ground. Other vital relations include time, space,
cause and eﬀect, part and whole, representation (where a sketch represents the
person), role (an element can be linked, as a role, to another element that
counts as its value), similarity, uniqueness, etc.
Fauconnier and Turner (2002: 119–35) introduce four types of networks to
describe the cognitive mechanism: simplex, mirror, single-scope, and doublescope. When two entities are linked with each other, the relation is made
through the simplex network. Relating two entities requires an additional
cognitive process besides simply knowing two discrete entities. A mirror

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

82

Blended images in Tantric visualization

network describes a more complex cognitive process. In this, both input
spaces share the same organizing frame, and this frame is also shared by
the blend.13 When one single agent is depicted performing multiple tasks in
the blended space, that reﬂects the mirror network. Here, diﬀerent inputs
mingle and do not demonstrate a clash. However, when this is not the case,
the integration network becomes even more complex. The single-scope network
consists of the blend where the inputs from one organizing frame are projected onto another.14 This type of projection is common to source-target
metaphors where distinct properties inherent to A are projected onto B, and
due to the clash resulting from the imposition of characteristics from source
to target, one thing provides insight to the other. In the case of the doublescope network, there are diﬀerent organizing frames where the emergent
structure borrows elements from diﬀerent inputs. However, what sustains this
network is the clash between the given inputs. In a complex structure, the
mechanism of ‘megablend’ depicts the structure where one pre-existing blended
space merges with another input (which in itself can be a blended space) and
gives rise to a new blend. This mechanism of blending more than two inputs
is also found in our everyday language.15 Blending various images is quite
common in Photoshop. The analysis of various Tantric images demonstrates
that Tantrics exploit innumerable possibilities in creatively giving rise to diﬀerent
conceptual structures.
Fauconnier and Turner (2002: 123) argue that the “organizing frame for a
mental space is a frame that speciﬁes the nature of the relevant activity, events,
and participants.” One of the factors that leads to conceptual integration is the
mirroring of aspects of other inputs that constitute the generic space. Among the
examples discussed in this chapter, the weapons of any deity reﬂect this mirror
network when various aspects are integrated into a single image that represents
particular functions or diﬀerent roles played by the same deity in diﬀerent
mythical times. In contrast, the conventional source–target metaphors are
considered to be ‘single scope’ networks, where, between two inputs with diﬀerent
organizing frames, only one organizing frame is projected into the blend.
Rather than giving rise to a third image by blending two distinct sources, this
mode of integration displays the projection of select aspects pertinent to one
image onto another. Deities borrow select weapons, gestures, or postures from
others in various Tantric visualizations in order to display their integrative
nature. This process can be analyzed by applying the single-scope network.
Conceptual integration exploits factually contradictory connections between
inputs; they develop structure not intrinsic to the source, and in so doing,
they rely on conceptual structure (Ruiz de Medoza Ibáñez 1998: 259–74).
After a blend, the blended space may constitute an input for future blends. In
the case of Tantric images, one emergent structure appears to be in ﬂux,
intermingling with other forms, borrowing properties from other inputs, and
essentially evolving into more complex forms.
Conceptual blend depends upon information derived from diﬀerent inputs.
In an image, there are more than two domains from which the inputs are

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Blended images in Tantric visualization

83

derived. Coulson and Oakley (2005: 1515) argue that if the information in
each of the inputs is very diﬀerent, the integration can produce an extremely
novel result. They give credit to two factors for this: 1) it presents a clash
of competencies, and 2) it accommodates the viewpoint of the speaker (ibid.,
1517). Mental space in blend can be anything found in the agent’s perceived,
imagined, or remembered scenario. They can be prompted by belief, images, or
situations. In this process, radically diﬀerent types of domains collectively
constitute a mental space. What is unique to the blend is that it always
requires imagination and mental imaging. Besides the integration of properties from diﬀerent inputs that occurs in the blend, disintegration appears to be
an equally prominent cognitive feature that allows us to analyze the elements
of synthetic concepts. The plasticity of visualized images, supported by myths
that allow the deities to emanate from diﬀerent sources, gives rise to diﬀerent
deities with their multiple sets of arms and heads, and makes this disintegration
easier. Here, since bodies are in ﬂux, they can interact and disintegrate for
future shaping.
Prior to concluding this introductory passage on the cognitive framework,
a few additional notes are pertinent. One, Lakoﬀ and Johnson (1980: 56–60)
point out that most of our concepts are partially understood in terms of other
concepts. This statement is crucial for our analysis, as the images that we
explore here are horizontally spread in a sense that rather than one image
emerging out of the other and some being really basic images, there is a
greater ﬂuidity among images, with each deity aﬀecting the form of the other
when the complex imagery arises. The practice of visualization demands
compression of multiple thoughts into a single image. These images are consciously preserved in memory, brought alive through mental projection, and are
manipulated in the mental space in accordance with the system of visualization. Another essential concept from Johnson (1987) is that our imagination
has a bodily basis and our cognitive process relies on our embodied experience.
Johnson gives the example of the body as a container, where we organize our
daily experiences in container terms such as ‘in’ and ‘out.’ The body of the
deity ‘contains’ particular aspects, and when the deity displays multiple
weapons and gestures, this signiﬁes a reservoir of the qualities attributed to
those symbols. Finally, cognitive scientists disagree about the nature of concepts. While some consider them to be logogens that resemble the spoken
language, others maintain that concepts are actually imagens that resemble
images (Paivio 1971, 1986, 1991). The image that is generated in visualization
combines multiple concepts, and while being an image, these are also equated
with mantras. In this way, these images display the properties of both language
and image. Tantras consider images and mantras as interchangeable, and the
blending of an image occurs in the same way that mantras are constructed, by
combining complex seed mantras (such as hrı-m
. , saum
. , phrem
. , etc.).
All images have the potential to depict multiple relations and complex,
related concepts. This process can be understood in terms of mirror networks.
A deity seated in a particular vehicle or a seat depicts her association to

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

84

Blended images in Tantric visualization

another deity or concept. Ka-lı- sitting atop a corpse in the cremation ground
depicts both her relation to death and time, and in essence, her transcendence
to time. The chopped head or the sword that she carries indicates a speciﬁc
role that she plays or a particular act that she accomplishes. Even the most
basic image with two hands describes two diﬀerent roles, and in consequence,
two concepts. Thus, the concept of mirror network has relevance to a fruitful
exploration of Tantric images.
Single-scope networks, as discussed earlier, are prototypes of source-target
metaphors. In the case of this network, rather than having a new blended
structure, properties of one are imposed upon the other. When a deity, without
changing her name, incorporates the properties of other deities and thus their
functions, the new image can be analyzed following this network. Often times,
the shift in weapons and gestures or an inclusion of new properties from other
sources indicate that this process is at work.
Tantric images most commonly display the double-scope blend and multiple
blends. In the case of Ardhana-rı-śvara, for instance, the images of Śiva and
Śakti merge in a single image with clearly distinguishable properties. The
deity image incorporates the characteristics from both, while the ritual or
mantras give the deity a distinctly unique status. In other words, the new
structure becomes an entity in itself that cannot simply be reduced to the two
sources. Another example is that of Lokapurus.a, where the cosmos is depicted
within the human body. Two sources, the world and the body, are compressed
in a single structure, giving rise to this imagery. The very term loka-purus.a or
the ‘cosmos-man’ vividly illustrates the two constituents that comprise the
image, with loka referring to the world, and purus.a identifying the individual.
In the blend, the two domains of the body and the world are integrated, with
all cosmic planes depicted within the body. While an individual is conﬁned in
space and time, the world, the total extent of time and space, is mapped within
the body. What makes this integration powerful is the disparity between the
ﬁnite body and the inﬁnite cosmos. The generic space is the embodiedness, as the
worldview supports the premise that the world is the divine body. This
double-scope blend is the most common among the conceptual frameworks
that are at play in giving rise to Tantric images.16 Another example that
vividly illustrates this is the image of Vajrasattva who represents the integration of two diﬀerent polarities. The two attributes the deity carries, the lightening bolt and the lotus, depict wisdom and compassion. Stemming from the
basic symbolism of two genders, these attributes incorporate conceptual
metaphors to signify distinct meanings shared within the communities of the
practitioners.
Besides the double-scope blend, other conceptual mechanisms that are at
play in giving rise to a myriad of Tantric images are the frameworks of megablend and multiple-blend. In the ﬁrst case, a preexisting blended structure
merges with a new form, resulting in a new structure. In the case of multiple
blends, diﬀerent network-scopes merge and give rise to a new image. The most
popular image of Durga- with eighteen arms demonstrates multiple blends. In

Blended images in Tantric visualization

85

the myth, all the gods defeated in battle with a demon distill their energies
that then turn into ﬂame and consolidate in the form of Durga-. The weapons
she carries in her eighteen arms represent aspects from each of the deities.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Yoginı-s and their sequence
Various forms of Yoginı-s were worshipped in India since ancient times. Their
roles, rituals, and visualizations have changed over time. As a result, the
Yoginı-s have been grouped in diﬀerent conﬁgurations. I will present in this
context only those visualized in kun.d.alinı- practice, as it represents one of the
central constituents in the Tantric practice. My objective here is to demonstrate how the cognitive framework can assist us in unraveling gradually
evolving complex forms visualized in diﬀerent cakras. I consider the template
used in analyzing the Yoginı- images as archetypal that can be replicated to
describe a myriad of Tantric forms.
The Yoginı-s visualized in the seven cakras clearly demonstrate the concept
of integrating images to give rise to new forms. In this depiction, the Yoginı-s
of the higher cakras absorb the energies, and thus the heads, of the lower
Yoginı-s. Noteworthy of this visualization is the inversion of the cosmos within the
body: corporeal centers are stimulated through visualization of cakras and the
six Yoginı-s are visualized in this process, reciprocating six emanations of Śiva.17
The Yoginı-s distributed within the mental space of a yogin demonstrate the
process of the rise of complex imagery in Tantras. The most frequently
occurring object, although not carried by all of them, is the skull cup. This
attribute suggests the link of these deities to the Ka-pa-lika pantheon. Except
for Ha-kinı-, the Yoginı- residing in the sixth cakra, all other deities have four
arms, a general metaphor of four directions, which in turn, is a metaphor of
all-pervasiveness. Six arms simply include directions above and below, reconﬁrming the all-pervasiveness of the deity. With this understanding, the diﬀerence
in the number of arms here does not change the original meaning that the
goddess is omnipresent.
Examination of the diﬀering number of heads of each Yoginı- allows access
to deciphering these complex images. The higher the cakra, the more complex
is the imagery, with the number of heads exactly paralleling the number of the
- cakra. For instance, D
. akinı in the ﬁrst cakra is visualized with a single head,
while Lakinı in the third cakra has three, Śa-kinı- in the ﬁfth cakra has ﬁve,
and Ha-kinı- in the sixth cakra possesses six heads.
The integration of heads comes to the apex with Ya-kinı- having 21 heads
(6+5+4+3+2+1), as she suggests the collective energy of all the lower cakras.
She carries all the weapons carried by the deities in the lower realms. The
multiple faces of a single deity can mean that the single deity simultaneously
carries out multiple functions, and that multiple deities merge in a single body
of the deity in order to carry out a collective action. An example can be given
of the goddess Ya-kinı-, whose body is the integration of the bodies of all the
six Yoginı-s.

§

§ (cup)

§

§
§
§

skull staﬀ
.
(khat.va-nga)
skull cup
trident (triśikha)
shield
counting beads
spear
drum
s̆akti
bolt
stick
gesture of fearlessness
sacred thread
goad
lotus
book
gesture of wisdom
freshly severed head

§

§

one head,
red color

one head,
red color

traits

19
- D
. akinı (B)

18
- D
. akinı (A)

Weapons

Table 4.1 Yoginı-s of the Six Cakras

§
§
§

§

two heads,
dark color

Ra-kin.-ı20

§
§
§
§

three heads,
black color

La-kinı-21

§
§

§
§

four heads,
yellowish color

Ka-kinı-22

§
§
§
§

Six faces,
white color

ﬁve faces,
ﬂamelike, fangs

§
§

§

§

§

§

Ha-kinı-24

Śa-kinı-23

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Blended images in Tantric visualization

87

This integration of heads in a particular order describes the sequence of
various Tantric categories. First, the rise from the ﬁrst cakra to the second
one is not a spatial shift. In commonsense space, one cannot be at two places
at the same time, but in this blended space, the Yoginı-s in the higher cakras
represent the merging of Yoginı-s from the lower cakras. Tantras meticulously
describe the rise of kun.d.alinı- as the surge of bliss that manifests in successive
order, and depicts the collective nature of the bliss experienced in the elevated
state of consciousness. Tantras describe the ultimate experience as the ‘universal bliss’ (jagada-nanda), and the blended image of the Yoginı- depicts this
surge of bliss as a collective whole of all other forms of bliss experienced in
the lower states of consciousness.

The image of KubjikaJust like Yoginı-s represent one of the earliest forms of goddess worship in
India, Kubjika- distinctively marks early Tantrism. This approach of applying
conceptual integration to explore Kubjika- forms facilitates the understanding
of other deity images. The fusion of multiple deities and consequentially their
roles can be identiﬁed in the graphic depiction of Kubjika-. This integration of
diﬀerent functions relies on the compression of diﬀerent images, and various
functions display the speciﬁc model of blend identiﬁed as mega-blend that
compresses multiple relations in a single image. These images display the compression of time in a single space by showing a series of gestures and weapons
that metonymically refer to speciﬁc functions. In the same way, deities residing
in diﬀerent locales are compressed in a single image by simply assigning them
speciﬁc places in a man.d.ala or by merging their faces or appropriating their
weapons into the new, single image. The archetypal image of Kubjika- demonstrates this complex integration and it can be used as a template to describe
various other Tantric images.
While the Trika imagery of the Pu-rva or Eastern transmission (a-mna-ya)
parallels the triadic goddesses of the Pura-n.as in the form of Ka-lı-, Laks.mı-,
and Sarasvatı-, the imagery of Kubjika, the deity of the Western transmission,
is at the center of all the deities belonging to Western and Northern transmissions. The integral body of the goddess is vividly depicted in the visualization of Kubjika-, particularly in her Vı-rakubjika- emanation. The goddess
has three heads and six arms. Her three faces are of white, red, and blue or
dark color, and with her six arms, she carries a blossom with gems, a skull,
and a book on her left arms, and a spear, sword, and a strand of crystal beads
on her right arms.25 The colors of her three faces clearly describe three gun.as.
Among the six arms, the two carrying the book and counting beads made of
crystal indicate sattva, those carrying the blossom and sword indicate rajas,
and those carrying a skull and spear indicate tamas. Furthermore, the weapons on the right side are more masculine, such as spear or sword, whereas the
blossom, the cup, and the book indicating wisdom (prajña-, in feminine form)
on her left demonstrate feminine attributes. The image of Kubjika- thus

88

Blended images in Tantric visualization

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Table 4.2 Face deities of Kubjika-26
Weapons and
Gestures

ParaMa-linıUppermost Upper
Face
Face

traits

one face,
white,
radiant

gesture of
fearlessness
gesture of
boons
skull cup
spear
bow
arrows
counting beads §
book
§
snake
mirror
diamond bolt
conch shell
additional
attributes

ﬁve faces,
rising sun

SiddhaKa-lıyogeśvarı- Southern
Eastern
Face
Face
emaciated,
seated
atop
3 heads

TripurabhairavıNorthern
Face
vermilion
red,
matted
hair,
peaceful

§

§

§

§

§
§
§
§

Carcika-27
Western
Face

§

§
§
§
§

§
§
§
§
ear of a
small child

integrates all gun.as, diﬀerent roles according to those gun.as, and above all,
the harmony of these strands that suggest mother Prakr.ti in her primordial form.
The visualization of Kubjika- also demonstrates the integration process in
which a single deity represents multiple divinities. The morning visualization
of Vı-rakubjika-, for instance, has ﬁve faces and ten arms. Her upper face is
identiﬁed with the deity Para-para- and is considered to the face of Kubjeśvarı-.
The eastern face of the goddess with the complexion of lightening is identiﬁed
as Siddhayogeśvarı-. The southern face is identiﬁed as Ka-lika-, the western
face as Uma-, and the northern face as Maha-laks.mı-, with a complexion of
crystal.28 It is noteworthy that the texts instructing visualization not only
detail the image of Kubjika-, they also describe which face corresponds to
which particular deity.
The visualization of Aghorakubjika- with six faces gives a similar account
of the synthesis of multiple deities. Her ﬁrst upper face is identiﬁed as that of
Para-, of the complexion of milk. Her second upper face is identiﬁed as that of
Gaganama-linı-, also of white color. Her third face, eastern in the second
row, is of pale yellow color, demonstrating wrath and identiﬁed as that of
Siddhayogeśvarı-. Her fourth face in the south is dark and is identiﬁed as
Maha-ka-lı-. Her ﬁfth and northern face is identiﬁed with Maha-laks.mı- and is

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Blended images in Tantric visualization

89

Figure 4.1 Kubjika-

visualized with the complexion of a pomegranate ﬂower. Her sixth and western
face is identiﬁed with Uma- and is of a dark complexion.29

The image of Siddhalaks.mıThe previous examples have conﬁrmed that the integration of multiple images
into one is not an isolated occurrence in the Tantras. The following case study
of Siddhalaks.mı- demonstrates the plasticity of images and an integration of
particularly contrasting aspects of deities in a single form. Multiple deities share the
name of this deity, and an analysis of these reveals the complex integrative process occurring in the development of Tantric imagery. Therefore, the image of
Siddhalaks.mı- can be considered a template for the study of the generative
nature of merged images, just like the image of Kubjika-.30 Her complex visualization gives a glimpse of the system that lies beneath the plethora of forms
manifesting in correspondence to their mantras and man.d.alas. The blended
image of Laks.mı- identiﬁed as Siddhalaks.mı- compresses various deities of
Śaivite, Vais.n.avite, and Buddhist Tantric pantheons. In these blends, deities
retain their identities while self-replicating in relation to the deities that
surround her.
The tradition of Siddhalaks.mı- has remained cloistered among select
Tantric practitioners.31 She is generally invoked with ﬁve faces, ﬁfteen eyes, and

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

90

Blended images in Tantric visualization

ten arms.32 She rides on top of a dark Bhairava, wears a multi-color sari, and
her body, including her central face, is white. Distribution of gun.as and the
primacy of sattva over tamas are explicit in this depiction. The ﬂuid substance, water or wine placed in the vase the goddess carries, metaphorically
represents consciousness. This ﬂuidity of consciousness in assuming forms
here becomes a metaphor for the plasticity of the deity images.
Tantras relate Siddhalaks.mı- to the Northern transmission (a-mna-ya), the
pantheon of Ka-lı-. The goddess is invoked as ‘She Who Binds The Sequence
Of Ka-lı-s.’33 As the Northern transmission of Ka-lı- prevalent in Nepal sustains
nuances of the early Krama system, and as the ritual manuals relate Ka-lı- and
Siddhalaks.mı-, the term ‘sequence of Ka-lı-s’ cannot be accidental here.
Siddhalaks.mı-, thus, is prominent among the deities in the Ka-lı- order. Some of
the attributes for Siddhalaks.mı- found in inscriptions echo those of Ka-lı-, as
she is described as terrifying (kara-la-), and the destroyer of time (ka-laka-lı-).34
Further conﬁrming this relationship, the Pa-t.an inscription addresses this deity
as Siddhika-lı-.35 Her identity as Laks.mı- and her invocation as Ka-lı- incorporates the most stunning beauty with an embodiment of wrath. The same
inscription invokes the deity as abiding within Śrı- Cakra, the structure for
worshipping the beautiful goddess Tripura-.36 This imagery is not possible to
envision without blending the already existing images of Ka-lı- and Tripurawith their apparent contrasts.
Table 4.3 Visualizations of Siddhalaks.mıGestures and
weapons

SL137

SL238

SL3

skull club
.
(khat.va-nga)
goad
noose
spear/trident
arrows
freshly chopped
head
vase
sword
gesture of boons
gesture of
protection
skull cup
hatchet
book
counting beads
shield
bell
gesture of threat
(tarjanı-)

*

*

*

*
*
*

*
*
*
*

*
*
*

SL4

*
*
*

*
*
*
*
*
*
*

SL539

SL6

SL740

SL841

*

*

*

*

*
*
*

*
*
*

*
*
*

*?42
*
*

*

*

*

*

*
*
*
*

*
*
*

*
*
*

*
*
*
*

*
*
*

*

*

*

*

*

*
*
*

*
*

*

*
*
*

*
*
*

*
*

Blended images in Tantric visualization

91

Table 4.4 Eight Laks.mı-s of the Siddhalaks.mı- family43

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Weapons
.
skull club (khat.va-nga)
goad
noose
spear/trident
arrows
chopped head
water vase
sword
gesture of boons
gesture of fearlessness
skull cup
hatchet (t.anka)
book
counting beads
shield
spear (pat.t.iśa)
bell
white lotus
Indian lute [2 arms]
drum (d.amaru)
citron
Snake
lotus [blue]
lotus [red]
conch shell
discus (cakra)
mace
bow

VL

TSL

*
*
*
*

*

JL

*
*

ML

JyL

ŚL

PL

GL

*
*

*
*

*
*
*
*

*
*
*

*
*
*
*
*
*

*
*
*
*
*
*

*

*

*
*
*

*
*

*
*

*
*

*

*
*

*
*
*
*
*

*
*
*
*
*
**

*
*
*
*
*

*

Notes: TSL = Trailokyasundarı--laks.mıŚL = Śaktilaks.mı.
JL = Jayalaks.mıPL = Pratyangira-laks.mıML = Mohinı-laks.mıGL = Ghoralaks.mıVL = Viśvalaks.mıJyL = Jyes.t.ha-laks.mı-

The visualizations of Siddhalaks.mı- appear to spring from the root image of
ﬁve faces and ten arms. Eight diﬀerent visualizations as presented in Chart 3
depict her accordingly. There are eight Laks.mı-s following this pantheon (see
Chart 4), where Siddhalaks.mı- is the central deity surrounded by eight diﬀerent goddesses of power and prosperity. These eight Laks.mı-s manifest with ten
arms as well. As Siddhalaks.mı- is considered the collective identity of all
ﬁve transmissions, every emanation of the goddess demonstrates the same
characteristics with particular focus on one or another aspect.
There are, however, a number of other visualizations that diﬀer from the early
template described above. In one of these distinctive variations, the goddess is
viewed with sixteen arms, carrying at her right side a sword, arrows, spear,
disc, a missile (śakti), mace, counting beads, scissors, and a slab, bow, snake,
noose, axe, drum, a baby jackal, and a skull-bowl on her left.44 An image in

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

92

Blended images in Tantric visualization

Figure 4.2 Siddhalaks.mı-

the collection of the Art Institute of Chicago ﬁts this description.45 Ritual
manuals describe even more complex visualizations, with the goddess having
a Viśvaru-pa form.46
If we analyze the eight Laks.mı-s considered to be the manifestation of
Siddhalaks.mı-, the most commonly recurring weapons and gestures are a
noose, a goad, the gesture granting boons, and the gesture of fearlessness.
Notably, these are the gestures of Tripura- in her Ba-la- emanation. One image,
thus, is the blueprint for the rise of other images. These hidden structures are
often described in terms of myths relating one deity to another, or with ritual
association. This cross-reference of deities allows us to read the integrated
forms more closely. For instance, the image of Viśvalaks.mı- bears many
characteristics of Guhyaka-lı- and it is noteworthy that both Siddhalaks.mı- and
Gukyaka-lı- are considered the deities belonging to northern transmission.
Viśvalaks.mı- rides a crocodile or water buﬀalo. She has eighteen arms and ﬁve
faces, each with three eyes. She has one dark human face while her upper face
is of a horse, the southern face is of an elephant, the northern face is of a
donkey, and the western face is of a jackal. She is seen as being intoxicated by
the consumption of wine and blood; she consumes the poison of snakes and
the ﬂesh of deities and demons. Her mouth is ﬁlled with the entrails of human
beings. She wears a crown decorated with the heads of the lords of diﬀerent
realms, and she is adorned with snakes on her abundant breasts. The integral
character of an image is also explicit in the case of Mohinı-laks.mı-. According

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Blended images in Tantric visualization

93

to Dhya-nama-la-, she is visualized as merging two divine aspects with properties
of Vis.n.u and Bhuvaneśvarı-. Although images often distinguish one deity from
another, the visualization of Śaktilaks.mı- is identical to that of Tripurasundarı-.
The distinctive feature here is the very name of the goddess.
The interconnection between ritual and image becomes vivid in the visualization of Viśvalaks.mı-. The Dhya-nama-la- (DM) manual speciﬁes that the goddess
is seen as having a white complexion for peaceful purposes.47 Accordingly, the
deity is visualized with the weapons a practitioner wants her to carry in order
to achieve those powers that the weapons represent. In her peaceful emanation, she rests upon a white lotus. The same deity is visualized as having
a dark red hue for the practice of controlling and attracting others, while a
black complexion denotes the purpose of killing.48 This description suggests
the ﬂuidity of forms while highlighting the distinct purposes of each of these
visualizations.
Besides the cognitive reasons behind integrating images for cultivating highly
synthetic forms of experience, there are also socio-cultural reasons. Deity
images are borrowed from diﬀerent pantheons in the process of domesticating
the practices of the Ka-pa-likas (in the case of Ka-lı-), or of various other creeds
in society. Since every family has its own ‘family deity’ (kula devata-), the
merger of families can initiate this process of blending deity images. The case
of Harihara, where the images of Vis.n.u and Śiva are merged, is a prominent
example. The deity introduced from another pantheon often changes her
original appearance so that she bears some resemblance to the central deity.
.
Pratyangira-, for instance, is an independent deity with her own tradition.
When invoked in the man.d.ala of Siddhalaks.mı-, she resembles her, and is
visualized as having a white complexion, with ten arms and ﬁve faces.49 The
same goddess is also invoked in Vajraya-na Buddhism, although the visualization
diﬀers. She has a single face instead of ﬁve. Both deities display the noose, goad,
.
and the gestures of granting boons and fearlessness; however, Pratyangira-, as
visualized in the Vajraya-na practice, carries a lotus and trident instead of a
.
skull-staﬀ and skull-cup.50 This indicates that Pratyangira-, as visualized in
Tantric Buddhism, is more benign compared to her Śaivite emanation. The
Vajraya-na equivalent of Guhyaka-lı-, the Naira-tma-, lacks the weapons present in
.
the visualization of Pratyangira-, and the skull-staﬀ and skull-bowl are likewise
absent.51 The black magic of killing and casting spells is supposedly countered
.
by visualizing Pratyangira- in ferocious black form with four arms, three eyes,
riding over Sada-śiva, bearing a skull cup, skull staﬀ, noose, and mallet. In
this form, she is depicted as eating fat and blood.52 Evidently, the same deity
is viewed in extremely opposite forms.
The diversity in divine form reﬂects the capacity to carry out acts desired
by the aspirant. The more the deities are viewed as eﬃcient in fulﬁlling
desires, the more their forms change. Eventually, when the traditions evolve,
the forms and attributes of the deities follow. For instance, the visualization of
.
Pratyangira- diﬀers for each of the actions she is invoked to carry out. For
peaceful purposes, she manifests with a white complexion, while for nourishment,

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

94

Blended images in Tantric visualization

she appears with a reddish-white hue. For controlling, the goddess assumes
the red color that resembles the pomegranate ﬂower. For attraction, she is
visualized in a dark red hue, while for immobilization, she appears with an
emerald complexion. In another visualization, she manifests in a golden color,
whereas in order to drive someone away, the goddess manifests with the color
of smoke. For the task of killing, she is invoked with black or reddish black
color. For hypnotizing, the deity is seen as having the color of a peacock
feather. In order to generate friendship, she is meditated upon as having the
.
iridescent color of a crow. Pratyangira- resembles the moon, when visualized
for liberation.53 These instances suggest that ritual eﬃcacy is at the foundation
of image formation, and when the same deity is invoked for multiple objectives, complex forms emerge. Rituals and myths are integrated in this process,
paralleling the blending of images.
The visualization of Siddhalaks.mı- can be compared to that of Siddheśvarıfound in Dhya-nama-la-. Siddheśvarı- is meditated upon in two diﬀerent forms,
with four or eight arms. The image having four arms is red in color, whereas the
eight-armed image is white. The deity, when visualized with four arms, carries
a pair of scissors and a skull, and shows the gestures of fearlessness and
granting boons. The goddess with eight arms bears a drum, trident, cup, noose,
and goad, along with the tattva gesture and those of granting boons and
fearlessness.54
Siddhayogeśvarı- bears a striking resemblance to Siddhalaks.mı-. Following
the Pratis.t.ha--laks.an.asa-rasamuccaya (PSS), Siddhayogeśvarı- has ten arms, one
face, and three eyes. With her right arms she carries a scripture, sword, drum,
and skull, and extends the gesture of granting boons. With her left arms, she
carries a bell, shield, skull-staﬀ, trident, and displays the gesture of fearlessness.55 The only apparent diﬀerence is the order in which the weapons are
described. It is noteworthy that Siddhayogeśvarı- is the fundamental deity
of the Trika system, and this resemblance allows us to demonstrate the
relationship of the Trika system with the liturgies of the Siddhalaks.mıpantheon.
The visualization of Śaktilaks.mı- diﬀers in extending the gestures of granting
boons and fearlessness, whereas these are not present in the Siddhayogeśvarıemanation. This similarity further allows us to link Siddhayogeśvarı- with this
rather esoteric tradition of Laks.mı-. Although most Siddhalaks.mı- emanations
display the gestures of granting boons and fearlessness, she carries a vase
in other visualizations. If two weapons, the noose and goad, are removed
from the visualization of Siddhayogeśvarı-, this image becomes identical to
Siddhaca-mun.d.a-, also addressed as Can.d.eśvarı-. The gentle Yogeśvarı- and
ferocious Can.d.eśvarı- constitute the core of Trika and Krama traditions, and
the striking similarity of Siddhalaks.mı- with both these deities suggests their
common ground. Sanderson links Siddhalaks.mı- with the Eka-ntava-sinı- variant
.
.
of Ka-lasankars.in.-ı.56 As Ka-lasankars.in.-ı is the central deity of Krama, this
identiﬁcation further strengthens the thesis that Siddhalaks.mı- is central to
Krama Tantricism.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Blended images in Tantric visualization

95

The ﬁve-faced form of Siddhalaks.mı- warrants scrutiny in light of the
Krama and Kula systems. In the krama initiation of Sarva-mna-ya (the existing
Krama initiation tradition of Nepal), Vajrakubjika- is visualized as having ﬁve
faces and ten arms, with her eastern face the color of milk, her southern face
black, her northern face red, and her western face golden, while her upper
face is of the color of crystal. Here, the upper face is addressed as Kubjeśvarı-,
eastern face as Siddhayogeśvarı-, southern face as Ka-lika-, and northern face
as Maha-laks.mı-.57 This visualization has several elements in common with
Siddhalaks.mı-.
Kubjika-, the central deity of the Kula system, and Siddhalaks.mı- share a
great resemblance in their visualization. Both have ﬁve faces with exactly the
same facial color, and both have ten arms, although some of the weapons vary.
As mentioned above, the ﬁve faces of Vajrakubjika- represent ﬁve diﬀerent
divinities, and Vajrakubjika- is her collective identity. In a similar fashion,
Siddhalaks.mı- embodies all ﬁve transmissions with her ﬁve faces.
Integrated images of the deity bring diﬀerent ritual forms into a single
practice, and this is vivid in the case of Siddhalaks.mı-. Vais.n.avite and Śaivite
elements are equally present in her rituals. Unlike Na-ra-yan.a as the consort of
Laks.mı- in Pura-n.ic Hinduism, Siddhalaks.mı- is visualized with Bhairava, a
ferocious emanation of Śiva. Narasim
. ha, considered a manifestation of
Vis.n.u, is often invoked as her consort, and is also addressed as Bhairava. The
deity is riding Rudra on top of Veta-la, which is not the case with the familiar
form of Laks.mı-. This blend gives her image more complexity: although
invoked as Ka-lı-, her main face is white. Unlike other deities with white faces
who sit on a lotus or other gentle vehicles, she rides a dark, fearsome Rudra.
The deity thus is a synthesis of the existing pantheons. If we focus on her
naming or even her white face, we may miss the essential part of mantras that
are integral to her visualization. Although the deity has her Ka-lı- aspect
somehow subsumed in her visualization, her mantras resemble that of Ka-lıand Kubjika-.58

Analysis and conclusion
Fauconnier and Turner highlight that conceptual blending is an evolutionary
process. While this theory has broader applications, my objective here is limited
only to the analysis of Tantric images to demonstrate the traits of blending in
the integration of various forms and concepts. The examples addressed in the
previous section clearly demonstrate that the Tantric practice of blending
images can be compared to the diversity of images generated from an application
of Photoshop. Tantric manuals exemplify a conscious eﬀort to integrate multiple
images. This intentional process of blending gives Tantric images some advantage in exploiting various possible techniques in giving rise to diverse forms. The
approach utilized in analyzing the three sets of deities in the previous section can
be expanded to explore Vedic, Pura-n.ic, or any other deity images. At this
juncture, the cognitive approach becomes relevant.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

96

Blended images in Tantric visualization

As Fauconnier and Turner (2002: 3) suggest, “we live in the age of the triumph
of forms.” While reading cultures, literary tradition shadows the studies of
visual culture, and even when images are addressed, historical analysis dominates the disciplinary boundaries. While the historical approach has its own
relevance, it cannot give full justice to the rationale behind a complex visual
culture, as it reduces the rich cognitive process to a linear history. The examples
oﬀered above are not reductive, as the generative and integrative nature of an
image remains clearly visible in any example. The conceptual integration in
an image of Gan.eśa demonstrates how ubiquitous this process is. Just like a
double-scope network is vivid in the image of Gan.eśa, multiple blends function in the imagery of Trimu-rti, the image that merges three Hindu divinities
(Brahma-, Vis.n.u, and Rudra). This integration of images leads to the fusion of
mantras and rituals alike.
Fauconnier and Turner (2002: 72) also point out that blending is an evolutionary cognitive process that does not happen “on-line from scratch” as
“cultures work hard to develop integration resources that can then be handed
on with relative ease.” What we need to be cautious about here, though, is
that it would be misleading to draw a linear history of the evolution of complex
imagery, as the same cognitive traits are visible in the R
. gvedic myth of
Purus.a, wherein a single deity has a thousand heads and arms.
The most basic of integrations that Fauconnier and Turner discuss is that
of the mirror network. In this network, entities are related to each other, and
while they do not blend and give rise to a new structure, they mirror in one
entity the properties belonging to the other. Multiple arms of a deity reﬂect
the compression of diﬀerent modes of time, space, and events within a single
image. All the deities listed above (Yoginı-, Kubjika-, and Siddhalaks.mı-) come
with multiple arms. In each arm, they are carrying weapons or displaying
gestures that relate to some mythical act of the deity, or ones that are borrowed
from prototypical myth of another deity. Following Hindu myths, deities
assume diﬀerent bodies in diﬀerent eons and subdue diﬀerent demons. By
integrating these various emanations (avata-ras) of a deity, these images compress
time, space, and action. For instance, the Nat.ara-ja pose of Śiva integrates
multiple roles and myths into a single image. It is not possible to locate the
cultural signiﬁcance of the gestures and postures without knowing the literary
culture. The cosmic dance of Śiva at the end of each cycle of creation, the
subduing of Andhaka, a demon of darkness, the ﬂow of the Ganges suggesting the liberation of earthbound spirits, the blue neck of Śiva marking his
protection of the world by ingesting poison during the churning of the oceans,
the elephant hide wrapped around his body that signiﬁes his victory over
another demon, all illustrate how a single image stands for multiple myths,
diﬀerent eons, and the diﬀerent roles the deity played in those times. The
mirror network is thus the most fundamental among the cognitive tools to
compress space and time.
In the single-scope network, “the organizing frame of the blend is an
extension of the organizing frame of one of the inputs but not the other”

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Blended images in Tantric visualization

97

(Fauconnier and Turner 2002: 126). In this structure, the framing input is
identiﬁed as the ‘source’ and the focus input is called the ‘target.’ Once again,
we can broadly apply this network in deciphering images. When one deity
borrows the weapons or gestures of another to mimic the other’s role, this
mechanism is explicit. For instance, when Ka-lı- appears in the pose of Nat.ara-ja,
the distinctive role is borrowed from the source to the target. Laks.mı- is
usually shown atop a lotus, and when Ka-lı- adopts this benign posture as
depicted in the Krama tradition, she takes on Laks.mı-’s attributes. In all three
sets of images discussed in the previous section, each of the deities assumes
the roles of multiple deities. In another example, man.d.alas generally depict
guardian deities (Dikpa-las) in all directions. When a single deity image displays
the primary attributes of these guardian deities, as is the case of Durga-, the
target image incorporates diﬀerent functions borrowed from the source
images. And this analysis can be veriﬁed from the literary culture.
Turner (2006: 107) points out that the double-scope integrated network is
far more impressive in its ability to project diﬀerent and often clashing inputs
from the diﬀerent organizing frames to the emergent structure. Analysis of the
image of Siddhalaks.mı- reveals the blend of the two diﬀerent domains of Ka-lıand Laks.mı-, where one is dark and the other is red; one is benign and the
other, ferocious. In depicting this contradiction, it is essential to note that
what is meant by the combined image is the resolution of apparent conﬂict.
The ingenuity of the mind lies in its ability to resolve diﬀerences and move
beyond paradox. This integration is commonplace in Tantric images, merging
and blending diﬀerent deities within a single image.
One of the elements discussed in the introduction is how identity and diﬀerence
are two binding factors in integrated images. All the Yoginı-s share something
in common: their vehicles, the surrounding scene, and some of the weapons.
Various forms of Kubjika- or Siddhalaks.mı- likewise share common traits that
allow us to group them together. What makes application of the double-scope
blend possible, however, is the contrast. This is vivid in the above examples. For
instance, the group of deities identiﬁed as Siddhalaks.mı- display contrasting
imagery, and each of the images is unique in what new element is introduced.
There are far more complex cognitive processes at play in giving rise to each
set of the images discussed above. In the case of the Yoginı-s, what is distinctively
blended is their bodies: the Yoginı- of each higher cakra successively has an
additional head. The image of Ra-kin.-ı with two faces combines Ra-kin.-ı and
- - D
. akinı, an explicit example of double-scope network. The image of Lakinı,
along the same lines, incorporates the early blend (Rakin.ı) with a new image.
This, therefore, is an example of a mega-blend. Even the most basic form of
- the Yoginı- (D
. akinı) comes with four arms, already a blend of two distinctive
images.
In Chart 4, I have listed eight Laks.mı-s from the Siddhalaks.mı- family. As
has been noted earlier, the very image of Siddhalaks.mı- is a case of doublescope blending with two distinctive deities (Siddhayogeśvarı- and Laks.mı-)
merging into a single image. In the images listed in this chart (for instance,

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

98

Blended images in Tantric visualization

.
that of Trilokyasundarı--Laks.mı-, Jyes.t.ha-laks.mı-, or Pratyangira-laks.mı-), even
the names suggest their merged identity. In these examples of double-scope
blending, both sources display a preexisting double-scope network.
Kubjika- and Siddhalaks.mı- are also examples of multiple blends, where
more than two distinctive sources merge in a new structure. The image of
Kubjika- with six faces simultaneously blends six deities (Para-, Ma-linı-,
Siddhayogeśvarı-, Ka-lı-, Tripurabhairavı-, and Carcika-) in a single image. Since
each of the deities merged within the image of Kubjika- come with multiple
variants, as demonstrated with Siddhalaks.mı-, numerous variants of Kubjikaare likewise possible. In this exploration of multiple blends, the inputs such as
Siddhalaks.mı- or Tripurabhairavı- (the blended form of Tripura- and Bhairavı-)
already display double-scope blends. Siddhalaks.mı- also displays multiple
blends and can function as a template for various other deities that come with
ﬁve faces.59 Unlike the case of the Yoginı-s where the images gradually evolve,
the deities with ﬁve faces do not reﬂect this gradual integration.
In essence, one of the deﬁning elements of Tantras is its reliance on
imagery. The generative and integrative processes that give rise to a myriad of
forms co-evolve with myths, rituals, and mantras. One deity image often
functions as a template for other deities. This blending of images implicitly
describes a broader network that binds diﬀerent concepts within. The practice
of visualization and deity worship help unpack the symbolism beneath these
images. These forms can be considered mnemonic in that they remind
the viewer of multiple concepts. While the images discussed above depict
complex structures that emerge borrowing from multiple inputs, there are
even more complex images if we engage some of the Ka-lı- or Tripura- forms.
They all nonetheless demonstrate the same integration process where multiple
inputs from diﬀerent sources are exploited in giving rise to a new image. As
has been shown, reading the underlying cognitive networks helps us decipher
complex processes present in the rise of Tantric visual culture. In consequence, this approach adds one step to shift the dynamics from the literary
to visual culture and assists in comprehending the hermeneutic tools for
deciphering images.

Notes
1 For a select readings on conceptual blending, see Fauconnier 2001: 255–86; Coulson
and Oakley 2000: 175–96; Sweetser 2000: 305–34; Grady 2000: 335–46; Turner and
Fauconnier 2000: 133–45; Turner and Fauconnier 1995: 183–203; Fauconnier
2000b; Fauconnier 2005: 523–38; Fauconnier and Turner 1994; Fauconnier and
Turner 1998: 269–83; Fauconnier and Turner 1999: 77–90; and Fauconnier and
Turner 2003: 79–94.
2 For the tradition of Yoginı-s, see Dehejia 1986; White 1996: 2003; and Dhawan
1997.
3 For the studies on Kubjika-, see Dyczkowski 2009; and Heilijger-Seelens 1994.
4 The deity is addressed in manuals and Tantric texts both as Siddhalaks.mı- and
Siddhilaks.mı-. While I have preferenced the name Siddhalaks.mı- in this paper
because the very name itself is evocative of conceptual blending. I have kept the

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Blended images in Tantric visualization

99

name Siddhilaks.mı- in particular cases where the manuals explicitly mention the
deity as such.
5 See http://markturner.org/blending.html and ‘Center for the Cognitive Science of
Metaphor Online’ for the recent publications in conceptual blending.
6 Both Fauconnier and Turner 2002 and Turner 2006 have ample examples from
visual materials to demonstrate conceptual blend.
7 Even if we select Indian culture as subject matter for the discourse, complex
integration processes are visible in early Vedic myths and poems. The R
. gvedic
myth of Purus.a, for instance, demonstrates a complex image of Purus.a with one
thousand heads, arms, and legs. Some Vedic deities come in pairs, for instance,
Aśvinau, or in a group (Va-yavah.). The Vedic deity Agni with multiple heads
demonstrates the integration of various ritual ﬁres in the sacriﬁcial order.
8 For historical analysis of complex images in India, see Srinivasan 1997.
9 For some early studies, see Siegel and Honig 1970; and Hernstein et al. 1976.
10 Physicalists have preferred to assign this role to the ‘brain.’ I am not using ‘mind’
in the same reductive sense. For discussion on neural integration, see Donald in
Turner 2006: 3–20.
11 For metonymy, metaphor, and conceptual blending in images, see Sinding 2002:
503–23; Slingerland 2005: 557–84; Sondergaard 1999; Turner 2008a: 13–32; Turner
2007; Turner 2008b; Turner 2002: 9–20; and Turner and Fauconnier 1999:
397–418. For art and conceptual blending, Cienki and Swan 1999; Coulson 1995:
2–12; Turner 2008; Turner 2002: 9–20; Turner 1999: 11–26; Krauss 2005: 92–131;
Liddell 1998; Liddell 2000: 331–57; and Maglio and Matlock 1999. For conceptual
blending and metaphors, see Fludernik 1999: 383–96; Grady et al. 1999; and
Turner 2007. For metaphor, body, and the conceptual blend in reading Indian
culture, see Hayes 1985; 2003: 162–84; 2005: 19–32; 2006: 41–71; 2012: 1–17;
and 2013.
12 Fauconnier and Turner 2002: 40.
13 One of the most cited examples of mirror networks is the riddle of the monk
occupying a place in the path at the same hour of two diﬀerent days, where he
climbs the mountain one day and climbs back the other day. For a detailed analysis
of this riddle, see Turner 2010.
14 Fauconnier and Turner 2002: 126–27.
15 Fauconnier and Turner 2002: 279–308.
16 The concepts of mantra-ka-ya or mantric body, ka-lapurus.a or ‘time being,’
a-dya-śakti or primordial energy, all depict this double-scope network.
17 Dviran.d.a, Ba-la, Rudra, Pina-kin, Chagala-n.d.a, and Maha-ka-la are the most
.
common linga emanations seated in six cakras.
18 MVR, pp. 36–37.
19 ŚVT, Chapter 6 (p. 102).
20 ŚVT, Chapter 6 (p. 102); MVR, p. 37.
21 ŚVT, Chapter 6 (p. 102–3); MVR, p. 38.
22 ŚVT, Chapter 6 (p. 103); MVR, p. 39.
23 ŚVT, Chapter 6 (p. 103); MVR, p. 39.
24 ŚVT, Chapter 6 (p. 103); MVR, p. 40.
25 Puraścarya-rn.ava III, 319.
26 All the visualizations in this group are according to Dyczkowski 2009: 192–250,
except if mentioned otherwise.
27 Dyczkowski does not detail the weapons of Carcika-. He cites Jayadrathaya-mala,
where the deity is visualized as carrying a skull (Dyczkowski 2009: 247).
I have followed Maheśvara-nanda’s description: kantha-sulakapa-lamettavihavam
. …|
Maha-rthamañjari, verse 71d.
28 Puraścarya-rn.ava III, 321.
29 Puraścarya-rn.ava III, 323–25.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

100

Blended images in Tantric visualization

30 For detailed analysis of the ritual dimension of Siddhalaks.mı- that blends folk and
textual deities as well as the deities from the Vais.n.avite and the Śaivite tradition,
see Timalsina 2006. For the study on Laks.mı-, see Rhodes 2011.
31 The secretive nature of this pantheon has left the scholars in this area out of the
loop. For instance, Sanderson (1990: 63–64) writes that he has not encountered this
.
(Siddhalaks.mı-) form of Ka-lasankars.in.-ı either painted or sculpted.
32 For instance, see the stone inscription in the Siddhilaks.mı- temple in Patan: sahas- - ra-nakuśa- (sic.) devı- candrikoparisam
. sthita | tripañcanetrasam
. yukta daśabahu mahabala
- rva-m
|| pañca-nana- maha-devı- ha-rakeyu-raśobhita- | divya-mr.tam pibantı-m ta-m
siddhipu
.
.
śriyam
. numah. || This inscription is dated Newari era 793, which is 1672 C.E.
33 … ka-lika-kramabandhanı-m || the Patan inscription.
34 viśvaks.ayakr.tam api yat ka-laka-lı- kara-la- | Pa-t.an inscription.
35 … pa-ya-d vo vajrama-ta- kulakamalavarodbha-saka- siddhika-lı- || Pa-t.an inscription.
36 pa-tu śrı-cakraka-lı- hy abhimataphalada- candrakot.ipraka-śa- || Pa-t.an inscription.
37 This follows Agnika-ryapaddhati and ﬁts with the Kashmiri Image in Pal 1975: 226–27.
38 The visualizations SL2 to SL6 follows DM 137a to 138b.
39 This visualization follows the image of the Alsdorf collection, Pal 1997.
40 This visualization follows the image of the Jucker collection (Kreijger 1999: 66).
41 This visualization follows the Pa-t.an museum Siddhilaksmi image.
42 The arm in the image is missing. Since all the rest of the visualizations have
.
.
ankuśa, presumably this Siddhilaksmi also bears ankuśa.
43 The visualizations of the variants of Siddhalaks.mı listed here follow DM.
44 Puraścarya-rn.ava, vol. 3, page 52.
45 Pal 1997: 214.
46 śataśı-rs.a-m
. trin.ayanam
. prativaktram
. trilocanam
. | hastadviśatasam
. yuktam
.
svasamakaraśaktibhih. || Dhyanamala 135 b.
47 The Dhyanamala (DM) cited in this article is based on the manuscript in the
author’s personal collection.
48 DM 136 a-b.
.
49 The Microﬁlm of Tridaśad.a-marapratyangira-vis.ayakana-na-tantra demonstrates the
ritual of the Siddhilaks.mı aspect.
.
.
50 maha-pratyangira- kr.s.n.a- s.ad.bhujaikamukha- khad.ga-nkuśavaradaks.in.ahasta- raktap-admatriśulahr.daya-sthasapaśatarjanıyuktavamahasta hu-m
. bıja aks.obhyamukut.a
. sarvalankaravatı rupayauvanasampanna. Sadhasnamala, as cited in Bhattacharyya
1993, 88.
51 Mainly based on the Sa-dhanama-la- (op. cit.) and other cognate Tantric texts of
rituals.
52 dhya-yet kalpa-ntaka-la-gnilaks.an.a-m atibhı-s.an.a-m | ka-la-likokila-dı-ninibha-m
. kantisubhairava-m || caturbhuja-m ekavı-ra-m
netratritayabha-sura-m | maha-pretasama-ru-d.ha-m
.
.
.
pa-trakhad.va-ngadha-rin.-ım || pa-śamudgarahasta-n ta-m
. vasarudhiralampat.am |
- - mahogra-m
. mahabhımam
. ks.ayamarutanih.svanam || evam
. dhyayen yantranaśe
kr.tyakharkhodamarddane | Dhyanamala 138 a.
53 Dhya-nama-la- 138 a-b.
54 The text does not explicitly identify the mudra-, but following the pattern of
Siddhilaks.mı-, it reasonably could be tarjanı--mudra-.
55 daśaba-hus trinetra- ca śastra-sim
damarum
. nr.kam | vibhratı daks.in.e haste vame ghan.t.am
.
. . .
ca khet.akam || khad.va-ngañ ca triśu-lañ ca siddhaca-mun.d.ika-hvaya- | siddhayo.
geśvarı- devı- sarvasiddhiprada-yika- || etadru-pa- bhaved anya- pa-śa-nkuśayuta-run.a- |
Pratis.t.ha-laks.an.asa-rasamuccaya (PSS) Vol. I, 112–13.
56 Sanderson 1990: 63–64.
57 Puraścarya-rn.ava (hereafter: PA), vol. 3, page 321.
58 The seed syllable of her mantra is identical to that of Yogeśverı-. The goddess, when
.
.
invoked as tejah.-sankars.in.-ı (she who consumes light), resonates of Ka-lasankars.in.-ı
and when addressed as mantha-na (churner), she reminds the practitioner of

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Blended images in Tantric visualization

101

Mantha-nabhairava. When she is addressed as siddhiyoginı-, it resonates of
Siddhayogeśvarı-. See, Śrı-vidya-rn.avatantra, vol. 1, page 134 (Kak ed.).
59 One of the most common deities visualized with ﬁve faces is Ga-yatrı-. Even the
popular god Hanuma-n comes with ﬁve faces that integrate ﬁve distinct divinities
(Vara-ha, Garud.a, Añjaneya, Narasim
. ha, and Hayagrıva). Śiva is often invoked
with ﬁve faces that combine ﬁve Rudra deities Sadyoja-ta, Va-madeva, Aghora,
Tatpurus.a, and Iśa-na. One of the visualizations of Guhyaka-lı- comes with ﬁve faces.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

5

Holographic limbs and metaphoric
bodies in Hindu myths

Introduction
This chapter explores the myths from classical Hindu literature that underlie the
premise that the body is a hologram, with each part capable of projecting
the totality. Holographic cosmology and epistemology give a diﬀerent perspective in reading images. This helps us contextualize the body in dynamism, the
limbs in relation to the body, and above all, the relation of the human body
with the cosmos. The worldviews being examined in analyzing Tantric images
are primarily monistic in that a singular reality is manifest in the myriad of
forms. In this paradigm, even the most basic form retains the ability to mirror
the totality. And this premise is not farfetched in light of some contemporary
theories. David Bohm maintains that the universe is in some sense a holographic
structure, and following the position of Karl Pribram, consciousness relies on
holographic structures. These positions deviate from mainstream reductionism
and give an alternate and viable scientiﬁc explanation of the reality with
which we are familiar. The holographic concept of the “whole in every part”
gives an entirely alternative perspective to understanding “what-it-is.” The
argument of this chapter is that this reality as a hologram is founded in our
cognitive processes, and the way we conceptualize, remember, or imagine
something has a holographic structure. Visualization practice, primarily the
culture of images, rests on these assumptions.
David Bohm, relying on the concept that all organisms and forms are holograms and embedded within a universal hologram, argues that the entirety of
the universe can be detected from and within each internal part. Following this
holographic imagery, the material universe and individual minds merge as
dynamic holonomic projections. Ultimate reality in this paradigm is an allinclusive hologram within which all other dynamic holograms emerge. Some
scientists go further and suggest that this ultimate reality is consciousness
that is understood as a quantiﬁable continuum of physical energy, and our
relative consciousness is embedded within this comprehensive spectrum.1 This
holographic model to describe reality also helps us understand Leibniz’s
monadology. In his understanding, “each simple substance has relations which
express all the others, and, consequently, that it is a perpetual living mirror of
the universe” (Theodicy 130: 360).

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Holographic limbs and metaphoric bodies

103

Although social sciences have their own maxims and laws, this alternate
model of describing reality can assist us in comprehending the conceptual
layout that interweaves Hindu myths and philosophy. The archetypal narrative
of Purus.a (R.gveda 10.90) describes that a single organism dismembers itself
and becomes many, both in terms of subject and objects. The concept central
to Advaita philosophy, that Brahman is the singular reality identical to consciousness and the world is projected within it, just like a town reﬂected in a
mirror, echoes the same holographic framework. The Yoga and Tantra
philosophy of pin.d.a-brahma-n.d.a, that is, the body is a mirror-image of the
universe (lit. the body equates to the cosmos), relies on this same understanding.2 This philosophy reaches its pinnacle with the notion that there is
just one single self (ekajı-va) that is all witnessing and other minds are merely
its projections. Most prominently, the narratives found in the Yogava-sis.t.ha
(YV) present the mind as the epicenter wherein the entire cosmos is mirrored
and this mind also gives rise to the mirror worlds. Following the paradigm of
Vasis.t.ha, each and every mind is independent in creating their own mirror
worlds within the mega-projection of Brahma-. Described in terms of bimbapratibimba or the “image and mirror-image,” YV’s metaphysics proposes that
multiple worlds converge.3 These metaphysical parameters are essential in our
understanding of corporeal limbs in Hindu myths, since the same conceptual
framework is operational.
Utilizing the concept of implicit and explicit orders from Bohm, mythical
order is implicit in the explicit order of our experience. We are accustomed to
interpret certain sounds as speciﬁc words, and without scanning through
possible meanings and syntactic analyses, we come up with its meaning. In
the interval between hearing a sound and grasping its correlate entity, multiple
processes occur, and it is as if we hear ‘things’ and not words. We are accustomed to interpret retinal input in the same way. What we think is given
through sensory modalities that have already been interpreted by our consciousness, and what we have is a ritualized form of experience. This paper
proposes that the process of myth making underlies the same conceptual
framework. Myths, in this understanding, are the product of a higher-order
consciousness that superimposes meaning to given sensory responses in order
to address our existential concerns. By reliving myths, rituals unpack the
underlying conceptual categories, allowing subjects to transform their experience
and relive past experiences.
Unlike the holographic process where only the image is fragmented and
observed, myths blend and merge two objects and create one image. It is
commonplace in Hindu myths that multiple deities integrate their bodies
within a single image and thus merge their identities. The image of Ardhana-rıśvara or of Harihara exempliﬁes an integration of two diﬀerent subjects. In
the ﬁrst, a couple occupies a single body, and in the second, two subjects with
distinct and sometimes conﬂicting roles merge in a single body. The Tantric
ritual of man.d.ala oﬀerings displays the same principle where the movement of
deities from the external to inner circles of a man.d.ala highlights the process

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

104

Holographic limbs and metaphoric bodies

wherein deities blend and merge into a singular form. While this integration
of diﬀerent subjects into one is a widely distributed phenomenon, many
examples demonstrate the reverse, where a single deity emanates as many.
This transformation occurs either with a single deity assuming multiple forms
to carry out diﬀerent roles, or with the deity manifesting in diﬀerent forms
from various limbs of her central image. For example, Vis.n.u emanates in the
.
form of a man.d.ala with the fourfold divinities of Va-sudeva, Sankars.an.a,
Pradyumna, and Aniruddha, and this emanation reﬂects various roles of
the deity.
Two goddess myths can be used to describe the generic process of many
other similar emanation narratives. In the narrative of Satı-, the goddess Satı-,
consort of Śiva, immolates herself in the ﬁre-altar of Daks.a. When Śiva carries
her body and roams around the Indian sub-continent, the limbs of the goddess fall to earth and each and every limb turns into the goddess, deﬁning
that space as a sacred site (pı-t.ha). The prominent ﬁfty centers of goddess
worship throughout the continent, following this myth, represent diﬀerent
parts of Satı- that manifest as deities on their own. In the ritual reversal of this
myth, all the deities return to their primordial form, essentially regaining the
original body. In order to recreate this myth, rituals break space into tangible
parts and assign these to various deities. The ritual prominence and concentration of the center suggests the revival of the original body of Satı-. In
this context, the myth of Satı- is also noteworthy for two additional reasons.
When outraged by the demise of Satı-, Śiva pulls out his hair and from two
strands the gods Vı-rabhadra and Bhadraka-lı- emerge. They eventually destroy
the sacriﬁce of Daks.a. In the same myth, Śiva revives Daks.a by aﬃxing a
goat-head to his torso. The plasticity and holographic nature of the body is
vivid in these examples.
There are wider mythical similarities with regard to the regenerative nature
of the body, and these parallels are crucial to the present discourse on
understanding the holographic body. In the narrative of Ra-ma-yan.a, the protagonist Ra-ma is barely able to conquer Ra-van.a because every time his head
is severed, a new head regenerates. Likewise, in the Greek myth, Hercules
faces the same dilemma in his battle with Hydra. In another myth, the heart
of Prometheus regenerates every morning, having been devoured by eagles
during the night.
It is not only the case that parts can recreate their unitary whole, there are
also myths to suggest that various bodies can merge to become one and
acquire a singular identity. The myth of Durga-, one of the most popular
Śa-kta myths, conﬁrms that the divine body is but a constellation of multiple
divinities. Just like the goddess manifests out of the energies of various gods,
she splits herself into two as Ka-lika- and Kauśikı-, assuming the roles of
isolation from, and engagement with the world. She becomes many, in the
form of Ma-tr.ka- goddesses and eventually these manifestations return to her
primordial form. Myths articulate the manifestations in two diﬀerent ways. In
the ﬁrst, the goddess emanates or splits into multiple forms and this process is

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Holographic limbs and metaphoric bodies

105
pﬃ
described by the term vibhava. In the second, the goddess descends (ava+ tr.)
among humankind in the form of Kauśikı-, Śa-kambharı-, and so on. In both
ways, the primordial body is comparable to the clay that can be shaped into
various forms. These manifestations are spatio-temporally conditioned, with
each image related to mythical time and space.
Select examples suﬃce to demonstrate that Hindu literature since classical
times follows a holographic model to describe reality. By applying the cognitive
processes of metaphor, metonymy, and conceptual integration, corporeal
limbs in these depictions display the totality and represent the total body. The
.
status of linga and yoni in Hindu myths and rituals as Śiva and Śakti, for
instance, describes the same mirroring process wherein the corporeal limbs
represent the deity. In Tantric visualization, the feet of a precept stand for the
guru, and the sandals of guru are revered as the preceptor himself. In a
Ra-ma-yan.a narrative, Bharata rules Ayodhya- under the presence of Ra-ma’s
sandals, where the metonymic association of the sandals to feet and the
holographic representation of the feet to the complete human body is given.
In order to limit the scope of this paper, I will explore the signiﬁcance of
the eyes and ears, the tongue, hair, and genitals in light of their mirroring and
holographic properties. What is common to these limbs is that every act of
consciousness through the engagement of these senses of seeing, hearing, and
touching conﬁrms the complete awareness of an object, no matter how
fractured the awareness is in the process of cognition. This is to say that the
epistemic process of creating the whole in order to cognize entities reﬂects the
cosmic principle of holographic reality.

Eyes, perception, and hologram
Three features of the eyes warrant our attention. The mythical construction of
the gaze, its philosophical reduction, and the application of eyes in popular
culture cannot be isolated from one another. Indian myths repeatedly conﬁrm
the power of the gaze, and subjective philosophies reducing reality to consciousness utilize metaphors related to the eye to describe reality. ‘Seeing,’ a
metonymic extension of eyes, is used across cultures as synonymous to
knowing. The way the mythical images gives primacy to the eyes demonstrates
the centrality of vision in our experience.
Since ancient times, human beings have conceived of the sun as an entity
witnessing with his eyes.4 The number of eyes is crucial to this discourse: the
sun is depicted either as an ‘eye’ or as casting eyes to witness the world events.
When used in the singular, the sun is an eye and seeing becomes identical to
its organ and the subject. When shown with multiple eyes, the sun manifests
the organs of perception in the rays, and this imagery crucially demonstrates
the Indian philosophy of perception. Seeing, in classical India, is primarily
understood as the process in which the eyes, reach out through the rays to an
entity of perception, transform into the shape of the entity being cognized,
and the ‘sense’ of this perception is then returned to the mind. Perception, in

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

106

Holographic limbs and metaphoric bodies

this depiction, breaks the boundary between the subject and object: there is
an actual inter-penetration in the mode of experience.
No perception is partial or incomplete. Our notion of ‘part,’ such as the branch
of a tree, is conceptual. Based on sensory input, higher-order consciousness
provides a structure of reality that reﬂects reality in its collective sense. The
non-dual philosophers maintain that what is immediately given to our
experience is being (satta-) or the highest universal (maha--sa-ma-nya), and this
applies to all modes of awareness, no matter how fragmentary. Congruent to
our discussion, Hindus believe that the witnessing aspect of consciousness
(represented by eyes) cannot be reduced.
Across cultures, consciousness is equated with ‘seeing’ and metonymically
linked to the eyes. The cultural understanding of eyes relies on metaphors
such as “seeing is knowing,” “seeing is touching,” or “seeing is being seen,”
and metonymy, where the eyes stand for seeing. Although embodied experiences
share some universal traits, not all metaphors of eyes can be universalized.5
As Yu (2001) points out, the primacy of seeing with eyes is vivid in examples
such as seeing for oneself is better than hearing about it from others. Eyes
represent the entire face and give an individual his identity. This understanding presupposes the metonymy “the part stands for whole.” Just like in
Indian culture perception is considered to be the meeting of the rays of the
eyes with the object, seeing is often depicted in Chinese in terms of a ray of
light traveling from the eyes to the target. Yu (2004: 667) explains that the
light moving through space in the process of seeing has force, “it has a sharp
point, as it were, that can penetrate like a dagger.” The underlying conceptual
metaphor is “seeing is touching.” This metaphor is also active in the Tantric
ritual of dr.g dı-ks.a-, the initiation through the gaze of the master that penetrates
into the subtle body of the disciple. At a deeper level, the metaphor is,
“mental function is perceptual experience,” and this relies on the assumption
that we can see with the eye of the mind. It can be expanded to the metaphors,
“thinking, knowing, or understanding is seeing.”
Universally, eyes stand for seeing and they have primacy over other sensory
faculties. While this is the case, cultural experiences of eyes and the metaphors and metonymies that emerge from these experiences cannot be reduced,
based on some common traits. Yu (2004: 675) points out that big eyes stand
for arrogance in Chinese culture. In Indian culture, big eyes recur as a pattern
in many images, and various glares and glances are linked with diﬀerent
emotional states. One deity is invoked as Viśa-la-, the big eyed one. Bhairava’s
glaring eyes are also known as the Bhairavı- mudra-, the gesture in which the
gaze is outside while awareness is focused within. His exaggerated gaze is not
focused on any object: the paradox depicts the harmony of transcendence and
immanence. Bigger eyes here are describing a higher level of awareness.
Having a vision is considered a creative act. For Levin (1988: 226–27),
creative vision “makes connections, it gathers and uniﬁes, it joins, it creates, it
reproduces and multiplies; it is, in a word, erotic. Vision, being inherently
metaphorical, responds primarily to things with a gaze very diﬀerent from the

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Holographic limbs and metaphoric bodies

107

literal gaze of the scientiﬁc eye.” In Indian philosophy, a similar concept is
described in terms of dr.s.t.isr.s.t.i.6 One of the interpretations of this term is that
creation is identical to seeing. This seeing, in the Indian context, also refers to
self-awareness, and the same concept also describes the dissolution of diﬀerences
at the level of the meta-gaze of the self.
In visualization, eyes stand for the transcendental and all-encompassing
gaze. The act of seeing possesses by its nature witnessing consciousness
(sa-ks.in), the disinterested observer that does not involve itself in the modes of
events. This seeing participates in the worldly processes, with conﬁned vision.
Darśan, or seeing the divine, becomes the inter-subjective gaze, as the viewer is
in fact anticipating the divine glance.7 Since the deities have multiple visions,
they possess multiple eyes. In the ritual ‘installation of life’ (pra-n.apratis.t.ha-) that
enlivens images for temple worship, opening the eyes is the ﬁnal act.8 The
image is believed to be fully present and alive when the eyes are opened.
While eyes and the gaze refer to consciousness, the opening of the eyes clearly
indicates the presence of the deity.
In images, the eyes represent the irreducible self. There are many instances,
particularly in the Kathmandu valley, where a deity is depicted by only his
eyes. Seeing these eyes represents the mutual gaze, a fusion of seeing. Along
the same lines, seeing possesses power. When translated, the term citiśakti
means the ‘power of consciousness’ and when consciousness is equated with
vision, this results in the power of vision. To see something is to have power
over it and to be seen is to surrender one’s primacy to the perceiving subject.

Figure 5.1 Bhairava

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

108

Holographic limbs and metaphoric bodies

This power of seeing is often depicted in the erotic gaze of the nymphs that
overpowers the seers or the wrathful gaze of Śiva that incinerates Ka-ma, the
embodiment of passionate desire. The third eye of Śiva, his wrathful gaze, is
depicted as golden, suggesting its ﬁery nature. The third eye or the mind’s eye,
when manifest in images, turns into a powerful gaze that engulfs the visual
ﬁeld. Many fearsome deities such as Ka-lı- or Bhairava are depicted with the
third eye. While the metaphor of “seeing is creating” is sustained in cultural
application, the destructive gaze is central to various Tantric images. The
deities with a third eye are often associated with liberation, as the destruction
of illusion and emergence of wisdom are identical. Further expanding the
power of vision, the ritual application of the ‘gaze of lion’ (sim
. havalokana)
describes the intense command and the radiant energy of the siddhas. This
gaze removes outer impurities and grants oneness with the deity. The goddess
likewise imbues the man.d.ala with power by the same gaze. Through its power,
the siddhas can send individuals to the highest planes of existence (Dyczkowski
2009: 48–49). This power of seeing, when embodied by lower spirits or
humans, turns into the ‘evil eye’ that can cause negative events. Seeing thus can
be the simple witnessing of the disinterested self, the phenomenal perception,
or the enlivening or incinerating gaze. In all instances, the subject or what it
stands for, has been synthesized in the gaze.
In Sanskrit, the term aks.a originally refers to the eye, and it also stands for
sense organs in general. This is how direct eye contact can represent all modes
of sensory perception. Just as eyes stand for perception, a function carried out
by ﬁve sensory organs, seeing stands for all forms of sensory awareness: to see is
also to hear or to touch. Similarly, the eyes diﬀerentiate between the world ‘outside’ and the self, ‘inside.’ The eyes are the bandhu that bridges two diﬀerent
realms.
In images, eyes possess a number of striking features: 1) They are proportionally bigger. 2) The divine body often possesses more than two eyes,
primarily three. The physical eyes depict the ﬁnite gaze, as it is conﬁned in
time. Classical texts parallel two eyes with the sun and the moon, the indicators
of time. Kr.s.n.a bestows the ‘divine eye’ upon Arjuna that allows him to
directly perceive the Viśvaru-pa, the all-encompassing form of Kr.s.n.a.9 This
eye transcends the modes of time, as what Arjuna sees with it includes events
that are about to occur. 3) Sometimes even the weapons are adorned with
eyes, such as the sword of Ka-lı-.
The mythical depiction of deities brings eyes to prominence. Some deities
are depicted as having eyes over their entire body, beginning with the myth of
Purus.a endowed with one thousand eyes. The myth of Indra describes his
transgression that leads to the curse of having a thousand vulvas and the
transformation of those into one thousand eyes.10 Many other Vedic gods
possess multiple eyes, including Varun.a,11 Rudra,12 and Agni13 who are
praised as each having one thousand eyes. Tantras sustain this centrality of
eyes in visualization. Two deities with prominent eye features are Śata-ks.-ı, the
goddess with one hundred eyes, and Mı-na-ks.-ı, the goddess with ﬁsh-eyes.14

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Holographic limbs and metaphoric bodies

109

The name Śata-ks.-ı is suggestive, as she watches over sages with her many eyes,
granting protection. In these depictions, to be seen is also to be protected.
In one Śaiva myth, the eye of Vis.n.u substitutes for the lotus.15 Śiva transforms Vis.n.u’s eye into the discus, ‘good vision’ (Sudarśana). Three entities are
shifted as interchangeable in this myth where the eye is equated with a lotus
that turns into a disk. The metaphoric depiction of eyes with lotus and disk
stems from the characteristics of the eyes and gaze as both watery and ﬁery.

The power of vision
As discussed above, Indian culture in general maintained that perception
actually touches the object. Following this paradigm, the outward ﬂow of energies
in the act of perception is shared by all who see or cognize. Deities, spirits,
and ascetics, however, possess vision with higher powers: they can transform
reality through their sight. This can be demonstrated in the Maha-bha-rata
narratives. For example, Ga-ndha-rı- asks her son Duryodhana, who is about to
lose the battle against the Pa-n.d.avas, to expose his body in front of her. Due to
her vow to keep herself blindfolded, she has gained the power to transform
reality. Duryodhana, due to modesty, does not remove his undergarment
when answering her request. Ga-ndha-rı- opens her eyes and castes her gaze,
making Duryodhana’s body invincible, except for his groin covered with his
loincloath. His groan becomes his Achille’s heel, allowing Bhı-ma to kill him
in battle. At the end of the battle, when Yudhis.t.hira asks Ga-ndha-rı- for her
forgiveness, Ga-ndha-rı- turns her face away, with fear that she may burn down
the prince with her gaze. Her gaze accidentally falls on his toe and burns it
immediately.
The eyes and consequently sight embody various moods and magical
powers. Saundaryalaharı- (verse 49) describes eight diﬀerent looks of the goddess
Tripura-, comparing them with eight cities of classical India. Following the
text, her glance is all-pervasive and so is identiﬁed as viśa-la- [lit. big]; her gaze
showers prosperity and is identiﬁed as kalya-n.-ı [lit. auspicious]; her brilliant
vision is invincible and so is called ayodhya- [lit. invincible]; it is identiﬁed as
the fountainhead (dha-ra-) of compassion; due to its indescribable sweetness, it
is called madhura- [lit. sweet]; with enjoying bliss, this gaze is identiﬁed as
bhogavatı- [lit. bestowing enjoyment]; through protection of devotees, this sight
is called avantı- [lit. protecting]; due to its victorious nature, this is identiﬁed as
vijaya- [lit. victorious]. Thus the poet carefully establishes a correspondence
between eight Indian cities and the gaze of the goddess. What has been suggested
here is eight diﬀerent rasas.
At the esoteric level, these glances depict eight diﬀerent functions of the
goddess. Following Laks.mı-dhara, the ﬁrst glance, identiﬁed as viśa-la-,
describes the inward blooming aspect of the gaze of the goddess that brings
excitement. The next gaze identiﬁed as kalya-n.-ı, the gaze of astonishment, is
correlated with attraction. Her dilated pupils, ayodhya-, indicate fright. Her
sluggish look (dha-ra-) suggests the intoxicating power of her gaze. Described

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

110

Holographic limbs and metaphoric bodies

as a slightly swirling gaze (madhura-), the glance of the goddess brings control.
Her friendly glance (bhogavatı-) subdues the enemy. Her innocent look (avantı-)
is described as causing enmity, and her half-closed eye (vijaya-) causes death.
Explicit in these depictions is the magical eﬀect of the glance.
Multiple sources detail the power of the gaze to materialize reality. Prominent
among them is the initiation through gaze, dr.g-dı-ks.a-. In this ritual, the sight
of the preceptor ﬂows through his eyes and touches the heart, or sometimes,
enters into the base cakra of the disciple, thus granting wisdom. By bestowing
a glance upon his disciple, the master enters his body. Babb identiﬁes some
terms utilized in the discourse, such as “the current of seeing,” “turning” the
pupils of the eyes, to “reverse” this current, “mixing” the sight, “ﬂow of seeing,”
or sight compared to “waves.”16 This depiction complements the philosophy
of perception discussed above. This ﬂow of sight is compared to the ﬂow of
water through a channel that goes to the ﬁeld and takes the shape of the ﬁeld,
whether triangular or square.17 This description utilizes the metaphor of
soaking: just like water soaks the ﬁeld, so do the eyes. In SL 57, the author
asks the goddess to ‘bathe’ him with her gaze.
Seeing, a function of the eyes, is often a metaphor for creating: the act of
seeing is parallel to the process of creation. Then, the absence of seeing,
closing of eyes, is compared to destruction (SL 55–56). The connotation of
unmes.a and nimes.a, the opening and closing of eyes, describes the process of
revealing and concealing the world.18 These two aspects of opening and
closing the eyes are also compared to the blooming and wilting of a lotus,
describing day and night (SL 57).
When the deities are depicted with three eyes, they demonstrate three diﬀerent
aspects of time: day with the right eye, night with the left eye, and twilight with
the third eye (SL 48). Since three modes of time are embodied by the deity,
she transcends time. The triadic depiction of eyes culminates in SL 53, with the
three eyes of Tripura- describing the perfect balance of white, red, and dark,
signifying three gun.as. These are also linked with three rivers (SL 54), suggesting
the three channels of the subtle body. Netratantra epitomizes the symbolism
of eyes, with three eyes of Śiva describing the triadic universe and the threefold
functions of Śiva. Three eyes of Śiva relate to the sun, moon, and ﬁre.
The glance of the deity is not conﬁned, as is everyday seeing. Since deities are
omniscient, their eyes reﬂect the totality. In poetic depiction, the eyes identify the
varied acts that the deity carries out: the glance of the deity includes all that
exists; it is supposed to shower prosperity; the divine gaze is invincible; it is
compassionate; it is sweet; it is blissful; it is protecting; and it is victorious (SL
49). These eight diﬀerent attributes correlate with diﬀering functions, which in
turn represent the eight aesthetic moods (rasas) (SL 50–51).

The organs of speech
The tongue, the source of speech, is mythically and symbolically interlinked
with the ears, the receptor of speech. The tongue metonymically suggests its

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Holographic limbs and metaphoric bodies

111

various functions: to consume, taste, articulate word and sound, and communicate. The Vedic seers related the consuming nature of ﬁre with mantric
speech, and with the tongue, which then becomes the metaphor for ﬂame and
eventually for the ﬁre-altar. In R.gveda, Agni is invoked with ﬂames described
as tongues,19 and the same text identiﬁes the three ‘tongues’ of Agni.20 These
tongues explicitly refer to three diﬀerent ﬁre altars. This earlier metaphor of
tongue evolves into that of a head, with ﬁre as a deity having three heads.
Deities are often equated with mantras and are depicted as sitting on the
tongue of the speaker. Two aspects of speech, hearing and articulating, are
depicted in the Vedas as śruti and mantra, where the ﬁrst is passively received
and the second is potent and ﬁery. Tantras describe a similar phenomenon in
terms of mantra and vidya- being male and female.
The metaphor of tongue further evolves, with some deities emerging from
another deity’s tongue. The Mun.d.aka Upanis.ad describes Agni as having
seven tongues, identiﬁed as Ka-lı-, Kara-lı-, and so on.21 Noteworthy is the
transformation of the tongue of ﬁre to the goddess Ka-lı-, often depicted with
her tongue outstretched. This exaggerated gesture overshadows the rest of her
body: Ka-lı- becomes the tongue itself. The Krama texts describe Va-meśvarı- as
the one who instigates creation; she is called Va-ma- as she vomits out the
world. The ritual association of Ka-lı- with left-hand practices (va-ma-ca-ra) and
her aﬃliation with Va-meśvarı- describe the same phenomenon. In visualization, Ka-lı- is usually surrounded by ﬂames. Although the connection of ﬁre
with speech is not explicit in the Ka-lı- imagery, she is sometimes depicted as
Va-c, the goddess of speech.22
The graphic depiction of Ka-lı-’s tongue has drawn various speculations in
contemporary scholarship. Kinsley posits that the lolling tongue of the goddess
suggests her great appetite for blood. In his words, “she is famished and
extends her tongue grossly to satisfy her huge appetite, which is all-consuming”
(Kinsley 1998: 81). While the description of Ka-lı- as eternally devouring
and all-consuming parallels the Tantric depiction of Ka-lı-, speciﬁcally the
Bhadraka-lı- form of the goddess, the suggestion that the outstretched tongue
symbolizes a thirst for blood is hard to reconcile, since the common gesture of
consumption does not feature the tongue in this manner. Kripal (1994: 152–89)
argues that Ka-lı-’s tongue symbolizes sexual gratiﬁcation, again without any
reference and supporting argument.
While the tongue, an internal body part, is prominently featured in imagery,
clearly visible ears are often absent. The unremarked presence of ears and the
emphasis on eyes suggest the primacy of ‘seeing’ over ‘hearing.’ This subordination of ears and thus hearing is parallel to the Tantric depiction of śruti
as secondary to direct apprehension. In imagery, then, ears serve an ornamental
purpose.
Ears in myths often signify the womb. Two demons Madhu and Kait.ava
emerge from the ears of Vis.n.u, and Kuntı- gives birth to Karn.a through her
ear. The ears of Kumbhakarn.a resemble pitchers, as his name suggests.
Pitchers have a long aﬃliation with the womb in symbolism, with sages such

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

112

Holographic limbs and metaphoric bodies

Figure 5.2 Ka-lı-

as Dron.a or human beings (the Kaurava family) being born of a pitcher. Sage
Agastya is also addressed as Kumbhaja (born of a pitcher). The relationship
of pitcher with the womb is vivid in these myths.
Ears are linked with both hearing and comprehension. In both cases, ears
relate to linguistic mode of realization. To listen is thus not just to receive the
words, as listening is transformative. Ears thus become the metaphor for the
attentive aspect of consciousness.
Noteworthy is the symbolism of earrings. For instance, Nat.ara-ja wears on
his right ear a ‘crocodile-ring’ (makara-kun.d.ala), alluding to his skills in
.
dance. His left earlobe bears the ta-t.anka ring, usually a feminine adornment,
that highlights his beauty. Śiva is also known as Ardhana-rı-śvara, the Lord
who is half-woman. The Nat.ara-ja image with two diﬀerent ornaments that
are associated with the two genders depicts this androgynous nature. Some
goddesses, such as the nirva-n.a form of Tripurasundarı-, wear the sun and the
moon as two earrings. Hat.ha yoga texts commonly identify the sun and moon
.
with Id.a- and Pingala-, the left and right channels.
Earrings are often used to indicate the lineage of the wearer. Just as the sun
is shown wearing earrings, so also is Karn.a, his son. As Bhairava and Ka-lıwear earrings made of human skulls, so also do Ka-pa-likas. Both Śiva and
his followers, particularly the Na-tha Siddhas, wear big earrings. The earrings,
kun.d.ala, and the serpentine power, kun.d.alinı-, appear interlinked in this

Holographic limbs and metaphoric bodies

113

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

symbolism. Congruent with this argument, some Ka-lı- images with two snakes
as her earrings likewise suggest kun.d.alinı-. In another example, the rings of
Tripura- are compared to the wheels of the chariot of Ka-ma (SL 59). These
rings clearly depict the centrality of the symbolism of circularity in Hindu
myths.

.
Linga and Yoni
.
Due to its polysemic
nature, the term linga is highly misunderstood. Derived
pﬃ
.
from the root ligi in the meaning of ‘motion,’ the term linga refers to both
23
‘sign’ (cihna) and the male genitals. In Indian logic, this term describes
the directly apprehended object that infers what is unseen. For example, in the
.
syllogism ‘if P then Q,’ P is a linga.24 When the Pura-n.ic and Tantric literature
utilize this term, they are exploiting this polysemic nature, and while their
source is the physical limb, particularly the phallus of Śiva, the target meaning
is something indirect.
.
In the context of images, the term linga speciﬁcally signiﬁes the divine pre.
sence. Categorized into three, the ‘unmanifest sign’ (avyakta linga) refers to
any uncarved object in which the presence of the divine is accepted. The
.
‘manifest and unmanifest sign’ (vyakta-vyakta linga) relates to half-carved
images.

.
Figure 5.3 Śivalinga

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

114

Holographic limbs and metaphoric bodies

In this, only the face of the deity may be visible. This symbol suggests the
interpenetration of the transcendent and the immanent. All images of the
.
deities are identiﬁed by the term, ‘manifest signs’ (vyakta linga). A sign,
25
accordingly, is that through which its referent is recognized. The foremost
sign of the transcendent is the very world,26 as its presence makes transcendence
possible. Since the manifest body is its sign, the ultimate is then ‘signless’
.
.
(alinga).27 The myth of the separation of linga from Śiva describes the process
28
of Śiva transcending his creation. This also indicates that a sign and what it
stands for are distinguished in the process of cognition, although the sign resides
with the sign-holder in the beginning, before the concepts arise. Bhartr.hari
conﬁrms this concept when he establishes the non-duality of the word and its
manifestation, meaning. When the world is identiﬁed with the sign, prakr.ti, the
.
primordial nature and the procreative force, is described as linga.29 Accordingly, Śiva’s castration suggests pure consciousness isolated from prakr.ti, the
.
state of kaivalya in the Sa-nkhya paradigm.
.
The concept that linga is the sign of the divine is described in multiple
.
ways. Skandapura-na describes space as the signiﬁer (linga) of the divine, since
it is space into which all dissolves.30 In this way, anything that stands for
.
something else can be called linga, and thus the ﬁre or the arrow that
successively stands for destructive force and lust can be considered the signs
for those superimposed functions (Daniélou 1964: 228–29). This ‘sign’
.
metonymically stands for the signholder when linga describes the phallus of
Śiva.31 Likewise, the womb of the goddess stands for the goddess, the procreative
.
force, and prakr.ti. Thus, the Linga-pı-t.ha, with a womb being the seat for
.
lingam, is a simple metaphor that describes the transcendence of the self over
matter, while residing in it. Kramrisch interprets the vertical posture of the
.
linga as a symbol of ascent that points to heaven and the regions beyond
.
(Kramrisch 1988: 180). The vertical form of linga also suggests the yogic
power of retaining semen. The Can.d.eśvara image of Śiva is found in iconic
form with his erect phallus.
.
The myth of the manifestation of Linga conﬁrms the same tendency of
resolving the tension between two polarities: when Vis.n.u and Brahma- boast
.
over their power, the Linga manifests itself and asks them to ﬁnd its beginning
and end, which these deities fail to do. The setting of the myth is the tension
between the gods of creation and sustenance. The manifestation of the ‘sign’
is the turning point. The failure of the gods to ﬁnd its two poles describes the
limit within which the tension emerges. The somberness of the gods, the loss
of ego, and the rise of the awareness of a higher entity, is the climax of the
narrative. Dissolving diﬀerence is the essence of the myth.
.
Just like linga is associated with manifest bodies, entities that can suggest
.
something else, yoni relates to speech. The binary symbolism of linga and
yoni parallels the relationship between va-c and artha, or speech and reference.
Tantric texts play on the polysemic nature of the term when they use yoni,
and use it in one literal meaning while suggesting something else. Tantric
texts exploit the polysemy of a triangle facing downward as yoni and the

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Holographic limbs and metaphoric bodies

115

vowel ‘e’ in the Śa-rada- script having the same form, allowing the connection
between speech and yoni. The syllable ‘aim’ is considered as ‘originated of
speech’ (va-gbhava), the seed mantra of Sarasvatı-, the goddess of wisdom.
Devı-bha-gavata (3.11) gloriﬁes this mantra with a narrative where Satyavrata,
an illiterate sage, becomes a poet by accidentally pronouncing this syllable.
Tantras identify the syllable ‘e’ as the origin of all mantras.32

Hair: the corporeal boundary
There have been substantive studies on hair and I do not intend to elaborate
upon a trans-cultural signiﬁcance that has been addressed in earlier works. For
cultural and psychological signiﬁcance of hair, the studies of Leach (1958), Berg
(1951), and Obeyesekere (1981) are immensely helpful. One of the noteworthy
observations of Obeyesekere is the distinction between public and private
symbols, placing matted hair in the second category.33 While these observations are broadly correct, what has been missing is a text-historical approach in
deciphering meaning. This discourse also addresses the holographic nature of
hair symbolism in classical India.
Hair deﬁnes the boundary of the body. This boundary is ﬂexible, as it can
grow, unlike other aspects of the body, without proportion. It can be
removed; and particularly among human beings, some can have more, and
others, less. Due to its ephemerality, it has been often discarded in the explicit
order of meaning. However, its implicit signiﬁcance comes to the fore when
we explore its cultural signiﬁcance. What deﬁnes the vitality of the body lies
not at its center alone but in its peripheral limit, the boundary that deﬁnes
being.
Hair in classical India has remained a deﬁning feature of the societal
boundary. A householder would generally carry a tuft. Although no longer in
practice, male Brahmin householders are supposed to keep diﬀerent numbers
of tufts to suggest their speciﬁc lineages.34 Traditionally, women would keep
their hair uncut, particularly unshaved, except if they were the widows. If one
is a monk following the order of varn.a and a-śrama, he would shave his head
(mun.d.in). The hermits who have transgressed the orthodox dharma codes
would keep matted hair (jat.in). In all these contexts, the societal body is
deﬁned and codiﬁed by hair. The distinction between jat.in and mun.d.in, or the
matted hair and shaved head, in this socio-historical context, cannot be
deciphered merely as a public or private sign. Matted hair in the historical
context relates to transgression, stemming from the practices of the Śraman.as
and Ajı-vikas. The Ka-pa-likas and Aghorins with matted hair transgress
social boundaries, and their chief deity, Bhairava or Ka-lı-, has disheveled and
upward-facing hair.
In classical India, householders from three varn.as kept their tuft, identiﬁed
by the term śikha-. The polysemic nature of the term is explicit; it stands for
both a ﬂame of ﬁre as well as the uncut tuft of hair. The śikha-, being associated with ﬁre, gives the hair-tuft an additional meaning of the inner ﬁre of

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

116

Holographic limbs and metaphoric bodies

the Kun.d.alinı-. The tuft also provides a social symbol that indicates a particular
ancestry. Based on these presuppositions, we can infer that private and public
symbols are not mutually exclusive. The religious signiﬁcance of hair is vivid,
whether the hair is shaved, matted, or a tuft. While having a śikha- indicates
the maintenance of ﬁre rituals, the other two forms relate to renunciation.
While the monks with shaved heads refrain from keeping ﬁre, the wanderers
with matted hair maintain ﬁre. In contemporary India, Sa-dhus maintain their
personal ﬁre altar called dhunı- and this is one of their distinguishing features.
In all contexts, matted hair is associated with the practice of yoga. Unlike the
.
monks of the order of Śankara with their shaved heads, these yogins are not
required to be celibate.
There is a subtle link of hair to life in these cultural depictions. The hermits
who practice Hat.ha-yoga, Tantra, or other forms of esotericism keep hair and
aspire for long life. The monks who shave their head conduct a death ritual
for themselves when taking the vow of renunciation. The same applies to
widows who are considered half dead, as they are considered the ‘left-limb’
.
(va-ma-nga). During the death ritual or in the memory of the deceased father,
the mourner shaves his head.
In the depiction of deities, the most noteworthy hairstyles are those of Ka-lıand Bhairava. Ka-lı- leaves her hair loose and disheveled while Bhairava’s hair
is stiﬄy erect. Myths link Śiva with Bhairava: as Śiva he has matted hair, but
.
as Bhairava he has his hair facing upward and of tawny color (pinga-keśa),
suggesting ﬂames. This Bhairava depiction again relates the origin of Ka-lı- to
the tongue of ﬁre. Most of the visualizations of Ka-lı-, particularly those of
Guhyaka-lı-, are placed within the circle of ﬁre, further conﬁrming her association with ﬁre. The upward-facing hair indicates reversal of the natural
order, as long hair normally hangs down. This reversal suggests the upward
ﬂow of semen (u-rdhvaretas), as both Bhairava and his followers are addressed
by this term.
Kinsley presents two possible interpretations of Ka-lı-’s hair that both relate
to the Indian social imagination of feminine norms.35 According to one,
braided hair demonstrates a conﬁrmation of social norms, while following
the next, unbound hair demonstrates pollution, shown by the loosened hair of
menstruating women. While both understandings are congruent in the Sma-rta
paradigm, these interpretations violate hermeneutic parameters by adopting
Sma-rta categories to interpret Tantric imagery. Sma-rta appropriation can
nevertheless be found even among practitioners, as the shift of symbol in the
case of Ka-lı- demonstrates her domestication by Sma-rta householders.
Also noteworthy in this context is a lock of golden hair in Vis.n.u’s left
breast that has its own name, Śrı-vatsa. This hair bundle is considered to be
the source of the natural world and of the primordial causal element prakr.ti
(Vis.n.upura-n.a 1.22.69). Śrı-vatsa becomes the signiﬁer of Vis.n.u in subsequent
literature (GTU 53). Two diﬀerent meanings of the lock of hair are vivid in
these myths. In the ﬁrst depiction, Vis.n.u carries it; the hairlock becomes the
describer, and Vis.n.u embodies prakr.ti. In the second depiction, the body-part,

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Holographic limbs and metaphoric bodies

117

in this case a golden lock, replaces the body of Vis.n.u. In either case, hair
stands for the world that is the outgrowth of the god’s body.
Crucial to this discussion, hair can manifest as individuals. In his rage at
the demise of Satı-, Śiva rips out some of his matted hair and it transforms
into Vı-rabhadra and Bhadraka-lı-. Other sources suggest that Vı-rabhadra
was created from the brow of Śiva.36 As discussed earlier, the tongue of ﬁre is
identiﬁed with Ka-lı-, while this myth relates Ka-lı- to the hair of Śiva. When
enraged, Śiva transforms into Bhairava. The myths relating to the hair of
Vis.n.u demonstrate a similar tendency: when the gods tormented by demons
praise Vis.n.u, he plucks two hairs from his head that incarnate as two brothers
Kr.s.n.a and Balara-ma (Zimmer 1992: 81). In the Deccan myth of Khan.d.oba,
we ﬁnd the same tendency: enraged upon hearing the news that the demons
are tormenting the sages, Śiva plucks out by the root a lock (jat.a-) of hair and
throws it onto the ﬁre altar. The sages then oﬀer ghee and the smoke coming
out of the burnt hair commingled with ghee gives birth to the monstrous
Maha-ma-rı-.37
Around the end of the Maha-bha-rata war, Dron.in goes to kill all the Pa-n.d.avas
in their beds but mistakenly kills their sons. Enraged with this, Arjuna captures
Dron.in and brings him in front of Draupadı-, the mother of the children,
for execution. In the dilemma of what punishment shall be given to this
baby-killer, the Pa-n.d.avas decide to cut the tuft (śikha-) oﬀ his head. In their
understanding, this punishment was equivalent to killing him.
Explicit in these depictions is the mirroring capacity of the limbs, although
the emanations are subordinate and not as powerful as the source. Śiva’s or
Vis.n.u’s manifestations, coming out of hair, eventually return back to the
primordial form of Śiva or Vis.n.u. When viewing the divine body as a man.d.ala,
the deities in the periphery can be compared to the hairs. Hair is thus both
the boundary and the body, the borderline. Due to this nature, hair is often
conceived of as polluting.

Conclusion
Mythical and Tantric ritual conceptualizations regarding the body demonstrate the plasticity of the body in the Indian cultural imagination. Even the
yogic concept of siddhis, or the meta-natural powers of becoming atomic or
having a giant body, relies on this plasticity. The holographic nature of the
limbs, particularly the divine ones, is exploited in the Tantric man.d.alas, as the
deities in the periphery of a man.d.ala are described as the limbs of the central
deity.
Language has often been excluded from the discourse on the body. This
discussion contextualizes that language lies at the core of cultural constructs
and linguistic ambivalence is at the foundation of cultural misappropriation.
Every term applied to describe the corporeal limbs describe more than merely
signifying the body-parts. This linguistic signiﬁcance comes to the climax with

Holographic limbs and metaphoric bodies
.
terms such as linga, where lexicographers exploit the highest potential of
these terms. Holographic limbs best describe the process of myth and image
making, where limbs, besides being the center of attention and of discourse,
replicate the entire image and stand as an independent subject.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

118

Notes
1 For discussion, see Germine 2007.
2 For discussions on this concept, see Timalsina 2008, 2009.
3 For an esthetic application of the classical theory of image and counter-image
(bimba-pratibimba), see Lawrence 2005.
4 For the symbolism of eyes, see Fingesten 1970: 37–51.
5 Yu 2001.
6 For discussion on dr.s.t.isr.s.t.i, see Timalsina 2006.
7 Noteworthy in this context are Eck 1981 and Babb 1981.
8 For discussion of this ritual, see Davis 1997.
9 Bhagavadgı-ta- 11.8.
10 Indra as sahasra-mus.ka or having one thousand testicles is found in the R.gveda
(R
. V) 8.19.32.
11 R
. V 7.34.10; Atharvavedasam
. hita 4.16.4. For discussion, see Srinivasan 1978: 193–225.
12 AVS 2.2.3, 7, 17.
13 R
. V 10.79.5; 1.79.12.
14 For further metaphor for the eyes of the goddess compared to female-ﬁsh, see SL 56.
15 Pus.padanta narrates this myth in his Mahimnastava, verse 19. For discussion on
the lotus, see Zimmer 1992: 90–102.
16 Babb 1981: 391.
17 This discussion on perception relies on the Advaita deﬁnition of perception found
in the Veda-ntaparibha-s.a-. For the study on this theory of perception, see Gupta 1995.
18 Spandaka-rika- 1.
19 R
. V 2.1.13; 3.6.2.
20 R
. V 3.20.2
21 Mun.d.akopanis.ad 1.2.4. This passage can be considered one of the early references
to indicate seven goddesses, making a clear link with ﬁre.
22 See the Rajasthani painting found in Mookerjee 1988: 18.
.
23 Amarasim
. ha identiﬁes these two meanings in his lexicography: … lingam
.
cihnaśephaso || Amarakos.a 3.3.25d.
.
.
24 See: lingam
. cihne ‘numane ca sankhyoktaprakr.tav api | śivamurtiviśes.e ca mehane ‘pi
napum
. sakam || Medinıkos.a 23.21cd-22ab.
.
25 Śivapura-n.a, for instance, describes linga as “the sign through which the reference
assigned to the sign is recognized” (Śivapura-n.a 1.16.106).
.
26 vigraho jagata-m
. lingam … Śivapuran.a 1.3.3.
.
27 Lingapuran.a 1.3.2–3.
28 Ku-rma Pura-n.a 2.38.39–41. For discussions, see O’Flaherty 1981: 132.
.
29 Lingapura-n.a 1.17.5.
30 Cited in Daniélou 1964: 228.
.
31 Lingapura-n.a 1.16.106–7.
32 For discussion on this syllable, see Nitya-s.od.aśika-rn.ava 1.6, and the commentaries
of Śiva-nanda and Vidya-nanda thereon; Netratantra 7.40; Tantra-loka 3.94–95.
33 Obeyesekere in Lambek 2002: 383–97. See also Hiltebeitel and Miller (eds) 1998.
34 The way śikha- used to be kept signiﬁed the speciﬁc family lineage, pravara. For
instance, those having ﬁve pravaras would have ﬁve tufts and three tufts for those

Holographic limbs and metaphoric bodies

119

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

.
having three pravaras. There is one Sa-nkhya master named Pañcaśikha, reminding
one of having ﬁve tufts.
35 Kinsley 1998: 83–84.
36 Kramrisch 1988: 322–23.
37 Stanley in Hiltebeitel 1989: 271–98.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

This page intentionally left blank

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Section 4

Visualization and emotions

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

This page intentionally left blank

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

6

Invoking emotions
Reading Tantric images in light of
Rasa theory

The argument
Indian esthetic theories provide a foundation for addressing emotions. By
utilizing Sanskrit esthetic theory to decipher Tantric culture, this chapter engages
two classical Hindu systems.1 In addressing the culture of Tantra (its arts and
representations), two distinct features are apparent, one socio-historical and
the other, contemplative and cognitive. The historic record demonstrates that
Tantra and classical esthetics were two streams coursing through the cultural
dialogue. Conceptually, we recognize that traditional Indian theories of
moods and emotions can shed light on Tantric practices in ways that Western
theories cannot. In other words, medieval India’s own hermeneutics provides a
framework to better understand Tantric visual culture. The bigger project of
this chapter, however, is to demonstrate how emotions have been deﬁned in
classical India, how emotion is cultivated through contemplative practices,
and what their signiﬁcance is in actualizing the self. Eventually the chapter
seeks to address some of the thorny questions regarding emotion in the contemporary discourse by borrowing essential concepts from classical Sanskrit
esthetics and Tantric literature.2
Although the overlap and interface between the domains of rasa and
Tantra have rarely been examined, their exchange is not so farfetched, as they
both ﬂourished in the same cultural platform. The eleventh-century polymath, Abhinavagupta, commented upon two seminal works on Indian
esthetics, the Na-t.yaśa-stra of Bharata which was written between 200 BCE and
200 CE, and the Dhvanya-loka of Anandavardhana (820–90).3 While Bharata is
renowned for his theory of rasa or “aesthetic relish,” Ananda shaped medieval
Indian literary discourse with his doctrine of ‘suggestion’ (dhvani).4 Abhinava
is perhaps best known as a Tantric philosopher for his original treatises on
Tantra and commentaries on the primary texts of the Trika and Pratyabhijñasystems. Besides Abhinava, several other Tantric exegetes such as Jayaratha,
Amr.ta-nanda or Laks.mı-dhara, also worked in diﬀerent aspects of esthetics.
Surprisingly, however, these scholars rarely endeavored to integrate the two
systems. The aim of this chapter is to change this scenario. And this approach
is congruent with some of the arguments of contemporary scholars who have

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

124

Tantric images in light of Rasa theory

explored the scope of Indian esthetic theories and their applicability to read
religious and other cultural aspects.5
The world-aﬃrming attitude of Tantric philosophy and rasa-esthetics
broadly deviate from renunciatory models of religious practice. Embodiment
is central to cultivating mystical experience through various forms of visualization,
and rasa provides the foundation for the philosophy of emotion in classical
India. The very term rasa, which literally means ‘juice’ or ‘relish’ and is
applied in esthetics to describe an elevated state of rapture, is used in multiple
contexts to describe mystical experience. Along the same lines, the application
of bha-va or emotion is central to the discourse on both esthetics and Tantra.6
In rasa theory, the concept of bha-va can be understood by analyzing various
dormant emotions and their stimulating factors. Tantras use bha-va as a constructive process where one imitates a speciﬁc lifestyle that leads him to
uncover the divine modes that are innate (sahaja) to the practitioner.7 This
term is also used to describe various states of absorption/possession (a-veśa/
sama-veśa).8 In addition to these two key terms pivotal to embodiment itself and
to the discourse on rasa, esthetics, and Tantras, the centrality of emotion is vividly
demonstrated in the religious discourse on devotion (bhakti).9 In medieval India,
cultivating emotions became prominent with the focus of attention shifting
towards bhakti, from its rather marginal status in early times to the highest
goal of life (parama-purus.a-rtha).10
While classical Sanskrit esthetes engage in a hairsplitting debate over the
roles that emotions (bha-va) play in stimulating esthetic experience (rasa), no
one argues that raw emotions alone give rise to this experience, without the
aid of assisting factors. The rasa experience has a transcendent quality that is
not found in raw emotions. However, this author does not contend that mystical
and esthetic experiences are identical. While it is the case that even mundane
experiences are uniquely distinct from each other, there is no measuring stick
to compare two diﬀerent experiences that are both transcendent. The classical
tendency of comparing these two experiences also supports the same argument. As Larson (1976: 374) argues, Abhinava “assimilates but goes beyond
any view that would reduce the religious experience to the aesthetic experience.” Relating rasa experience with the mystical is not a new issue; Bhat.t.a
Na-yaka compared the esthetic experience with the mystical experience of the
yogis.11 Abhinava in one place states that aesthetic experience is “like the bliss
that comes from realizing [one’s identity] with the highest Brahman, for it
consists of repose in the bliss which is the true nature of one’s own self, a
nature which is basically sattva but is intermingled with the diversity of rajas
and tamas.”12
Tantras provide the same positive outlook towards sensory pleasure and
various other embodied experiences as does the aesthetic theory of rasa. The
lived experience of Tantric rituals requires the active engagement of the
adept’s senses in alignment with their corresponding objects, directed to
stimulate particular cognitive and emotional conditions. Diﬀerent visualization
practices seem to be associated with diﬀerent emotional states. For instance,

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Tantric images in light of Rasa theory

125

the visualization of Ka-lı- is linked with the practice of wearing a sword, living
in a cremation ground, or drinking liquor. The visualization of Tripura-, along
the same lines, is linked with decoration, the use of fragrance, living a lavish
lifestyle, music, etc.13 If observed closely, it becomes clear that distinct Tantric
practices place certain emotions at the center. A liberating esoteric experience,
in this depiction, is not excluded from the play of emotions, but rather, these
mundane experiences are essential in cultivating mystical experience. That
Tantra is an emotionally active and rich tradition instead of an intellectual
collection of concepts or an ascetic tradition devoid of passions is suﬃcient
reason to embrace aesthetics for interpreting Tantric experience.
Emotions, even in the context when they are cultivated only in order to
transcend them, are central to both Tantric and aesthetic experiences.14 The
esoteric experience, central to the practice of Tantra, is not a transcendental
experience that manifests in negation of corporeality, but rather, it breaches
the dichotomy of the mind and body. At the somatic level, this experience is a
consequence not merely of so-called ‘positive’ emotions, but also of emotions
such as fury, disgust, or marvel. Rather than transcending somatic conditions
in order to achieve liberation, the Tantric approach embraces emotions as its path,
and in this process, it provides a higher meaning to embodied experience.
While the goal of both Tantric and aesthetic activity is to reach to the transcendent (lokottara) experience, it is in their immanent modes of rejoicing that
the link between these two systems is found.
In the absence of this cultural frame of reference, Tantric visualizations are
obscure and their rituals are perplexing. A discourse on Tantra that does not
engage images and rituals is not a Tantric discourse. And it is not possible to
apprehend these elements without bringing visualization to the center. More
than that, a hermeneutic shift in the interpretation of emotions is mandatory,
as Tantras not only embrace the idea of the erotic, but it also gives the same
centrality to the so-called negative emotions. The placement of negative
emotions within esthetic discourse is one of the essential features that
make the marriage between these two systems possible.
Following rasa theory, there is not only a single mood that characterizes
esthetic pleasure. Just as the viewer can experience bliss through watching a
heroic drama, so also can he transform his experience to esthetic rapture
through the sense of horror. Along the same lines, Tantras maintain that bliss
and awareness – terms also used to describe the self – are at the core of every
single experience. One could thus connect to this ontological ground through
joy, disgust, or fear. When experienced as ordinary emotions, they can be
positive or negative, but when elevated to the level of rasa, they all provide
esthetic relish. The recognition (pratyabhijña-) of the self is thus not that of a
disembodied and disinterested witnessing self. Accordingly, the body is not
the problem but the means of liberation. Corporality is the presupposition of
the emotional self and thus of liberation. Obscure Tantric practices, while
reinforcing embodiment, simultaneously promote transcendence, as these
experiences do not culminate in esthetic pleasure alone, but are considered as

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

126

Tantric images in light of Rasa theory

instrumental to the experience of jagada-nanda, the all-embodying bliss found
in the state of self-realization. Tantric contemplations diﬀer primarily in the sense
that they are not exclusive to certain emotions but rather, they seek to cultivate these dormant emotions to their fullest expression. And this centrality of
emotions is what makes rasa theory compatible. Following the theory of rasa,
esthetic bliss can be experienced in eight diﬀerent modes: the experience of
beauty, heroism, compassion, wonder, humor, fear, disgust, and anger. Four
among these, the experience of heroism, fear, disgust, and anger embody
violent aspects that can be present in the esthetic experience. Esthetic bliss, in
this paradigm, not only transcends thoughts and emotions, it is simultaneously felt and corporeally experienced. The argument is, even the experience of violence, disgust, fear, or anger can stimulate esthetic pleasure as any
other mood can, and any of these can likewise be instrumental in recognizing
the essential nature of the self.
Both Tantra and rasa utilize the term of a ‘transcendent astonishment’
(lokottara camatka-ra) to describe their highest state of experience. It would be
wrong to understand this ‘transcendent’ (lokottara
pﬃ or alaukika) only as ‘otherworldly.’ The term loka, derived from the root locr. in the meaning of seeing,
describes both the sensory faculties through which perception is made possible and the realm of perception. What is considered ‘transcendent’ is that
which is beyond the scope of the sense organs. In this way, the rasa experience
is posited as a sensation before it is cognized. It would be wrong, however, to
understand rasa as just a coarse sensation. Rasa experience is explicitly cultivated, with multiple emotions merging together in a synthetic experience. This
does not make rasa experience subordinate to, or distant from, self-experience
either. Just like yogic experience is the most fundamental, albeit attained
through rigorous practice and reﬁned experience, so also is rasa, being the
esthetic experience where the boundary between the experiencing self and the
object of experience is marginal, and the self is introverted and reﬂexively
experiencing its own blissful state. Jaganna-tha deﬁnes rasa experience as
breaking the barrier that conceals consciousness (cid).15 Since consciousness is
identiﬁed with the self, the rasa experience is thus the inward experience of
the self. While both Tantrikas and esthetes would hesitate to make the highest
experiences sought by their disciples identical, the procedure through which
these experiences are cultivated and the language used to describe them are
stunningly similar.

The framework of rasa
That rasa theory is not monolithic can be clearly seen in the classical debate
over the number of rasas and the mechanism to experience them.16 This is not
the place to engage the classical philosophical debate over the nature of rasa,
as many contemporary writings address these issues.17 The application of rasa
to understand religious experience and the comparison of rasa to catharsis
and its application as a viable literary theory is also not new.18 Although

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Tantric images in light of Rasa theory

127

available in secondary literature, it is necessary to brieﬂy address the framework
of rasa before engaging visualization practices in light of this esthetic theory.
According to Bharata, esthetic experience (rasa) is expressed through
the “conjunction of the determinants (vibha-vas) [that function as the instigators], the consequents (anubha-vas) and the complementary psychological
states (vyabhica-rins) [that accompany the emotions]” (NŚ VI.33). The stimulants
instrumental in bringing the dormant (stha-yin) emotions such as passion to
the forefront of experience are called determinants. Those that are instrumental in causing passion etc. to be experienced as after or subordinate to
another experience are called the consequents. Those that are instrumental in
letting passion etc. ﬂow throughout the body are called the complementary
psychological states.19 These are all subordinate to rasa experience. Bharata
counts forty-nine emotions, of which he describes eight as ‘dormant’
(stha-yin). These emotions (love, joy, sorrow, anger, energy, fear, disgust, and
astonishment) form the core of the eight central esthetic experiences (erotic
.
(śr.nga-ra), comic (ha-sya), tragic (karun.a), furious (raudra), heroic (vı-ra),
timorous (bhaya-naka), disgusting (bı-bhatsa), and wonderous (adbhuta)). The
emotions listed as ‘dormant’ are to be understood as “the emotion which is
not swallowed up by other emotions whether friendly with it or unfriendly,
which quickly dissolves the others into its own condition like the salt-sea,
which endures continuously in the mind, and which, combining with its
objects and situations, attains to its fullest expression as rasa – that is the
durable emotion.”20
.
Among these, only four rasas are considered as primary: erotic (śr.nga-ra),
heroic (vı-ra), disgusting (bı-bhatsa), and furious (raudra). This, in essence, aﬃrms
the primacy of four durable emotions: desire (rati), heroic energy (utsa-ha),
disgust (jugupsa-), and anger (krodha). The discourse on rasa also highlights that
there are four rasas that contrast and are paired with the remaining four
(erotic with disgusting, heroic with timorous, furious with marvelous, and
comic with tragic).21 Along the same lines, a sentiment central to experiencing
one rasa can be subsidiary to the experience of another. Furthermore,
these rasas can manifest as dominant with one and subordinate with another.
It is essential to bear in mind that, when the mind experiences rajas and
tamas and is not supported by the surge of sattva, the same emotions remain
raw and cannot complement the cultivation of rasa. However, when poised
with sattva in mind, these otherwise ordinary emotions transform into the
aesthetic experience. Accordingly, it is possible to undergo anger or disgust
while the mind remains in the sattvic state. Gun.as, along these lines, are like
the platforms through which the emotions pass. While not all emotions are
latent, those considered dormant rise to the state of rasa. Certain emotions,
along these lines, are essential to the self itself.22 These features characterize
the primacy of emotions in rasa. When Tantras appropriate this aesthetic
framework and integrate esoteric experience with the play of emotions, it
becomes clear that there is no tension within this system between the mind
and the body.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

128

Tantric images in light of Rasa theory

When emotions remain purely within the realm of corporeal sensation, they
simply generate pain or pleasure and fail to stimulate the rasa experience.
Rasa experience is thus distinct from a commonsense pleasure. These very
emotions, when merged with the inner self having shattered the dichotomy of
subject and object, give rise to the surge of bliss that is quintessential to the
self. Aesthetic rasa experience is described as self-revealing, accepting its
noetic quality. Tantras describe consciousness as reﬂexive and also identical to
the self. When enjoying rasa, there is merely a ﬂow of sattva, the pure mode
of mental experience, no matter what the particular stimulating factor that
gives rise to the rasa experience is (Sa-hityadarpan.a SD 3.2–3). In other words,
emotions such as anger, disgust, or horror lack the qualities of rajas and
tamas when being experienced as rasa. And in this state, the mind is naturally
turned inward, as it is the nature of sattva to orient towards the self.23
Rasa is described as ‘self-manifest and of the nature of bliss and awareness’
(svapraka-śa-nanda-cinmaya), and ‘devoid of the touch with any other object of
cognition’ (vedya-ntarasparśaśu-nya SD 3.2). The ﬁrst attribute identiﬁes the
emotional experience that is elevated to the status of rasa with the self, and
the second negates contact with any externals, even if mental. Rasa is thus the
very self revealed, and the play of emotions is as central to self-experience as
it is for embodiment. This rasa experience is also explained as ‘devoid of
portions’ (akhan.d.a), diﬀerentiating it from the particular experiences where
the subject-object dichotomy is essential. This transcendent or precognitive
quality of rasa experience is what distinguishes it from commonsense experience. However, it is not the case that the emotions that instigate the rasa
experience are lacking in the subsequent stage of transforming into rasa. All
the emotions are singularly felt in the mode of experiencing rasa, like tasting
a cocktail drink.24 This experience is synethetic by deﬁnition, and makes the
generic entity as its object, rather than objectifying a particular.
Utilizing the same arguments, Madhusu-dana conﬁrms that rasa experience
is blissful, even when derived from painful emotions such as anger, disgust, or
grief. He maintains that although the emotions residing in the object of
awareness generate pain or pleasure accordingly, these very emotions, when
residing in the subject of awareness, generate pure bliss.25 Rasa experience
thus transcends the reference that stimulates particular emotions. This is when
the ﬂow of consciousness found in externalized instances of emotions returns
back to its source, to the subject of experience, and manifests in the form of
rasa. In this rasa experience, the mind has a single mode of sattva, comprised
of collective emotions. This collective manifestation of multiple moods that
stimulate sattva gives rise to transcendent bliss.26 The essence of rasa experience
is ‘wonder’27 where the self is revealed. This disclosure, while being instigated
by emotions, cannot be reduced to them, and this is why Abhinava avoids using
the terms of coming to experience, rise, or manifestation, when describing rasa
experience.28
The question remains, even if rasa experience does arise through emotions
that are blissful, with the argument that the self is of the character of

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Tantric images in light of Rasa theory

129

undivided bliss (a-nanda), how can the negative emotions that are painful and
thus opposite to the self-nature instigate the expression of rasa? Viśvana-tha
responds to this objection by saying that even tragic emotions are embedded
with the supreme delight and this is vivid even in ordinary experiences (SD
3.4). The argument is plain and simple: if the pain experienced in watching a
tragedy is not subordinated by another blissful experience, one would not
watch it again (SD 3.5). The shift from common emotion to esthetic bliss is
thus easier to explain in the case when negative emotions are assisting the
rasa experience. According to Viśvana-tha, these emotions do give pain in the
ordinary context, but what makes it diﬀerent is the context of poetry (SD 3.6–7).
Viśvana-tha argues that, just as one enjoys the mild masochistic sex act of
biting, these pain sensations, if they stimulate rasa experience, do not result in
causing pain.29 This example from commonsense experience diﬀers from the
earlier one, where the transcendence of rasa experience somewhat overshadows
the ordinary experience of pain. Just as the esthetes maintain that all emotions
are potent enough to instigate the rasa experience, so do the Tantrikas, by saying
that all ordinary experiences have the same transcendent bliss and awareness
embedded within.
Rasa experience has both immanent and transcendent qualities. As emotion,
it is embodied, and since it is not simply a raw emotion but cultivated in a
speciﬁc way that allows the mind to move beyond its everyday constructs, it is
also transcendent. This distinction is vividly demonstrated when we explore
the arguments that address the cultivation of rasa. Emotions do not necessarily grant esthetic bliss. Disgust, fear, or anger may simply arise and dissolve
after leaving some somatic imprints. These same emotions, when endowed
with appropriate complements, culminate in rasa, the esthetic experience. The
embodied nature of rasa experience is exempliﬁed with the speciﬁc emotions
(bha-va) that are called sa-ttvika. Eight sa-ttvika moods counted by Bharata –
spellbound (stambha), perspiration (sveda), horripilation (roma-ñca), voice
.
breaking (svarabhanga), tremor (vepathu), change of color (vaivarn.yam), tears
(aśru), and being unconscious (pralaya) – are the corporeal symptoms of
emotional content.30 SD details that these symptoms are considered as originated from sattva (SD 3.134), and therefore are not the products of the senses
being engaged with external entities. A clear distinction can be made between
these symptoms derived in reaction to stimuli and those manifest by the surge
of bliss. Similar symptoms are also described in the progressive steps of the
rise of kun.d.alinı-, yet another key element that relates esthetic and mystical
experiences to one another.31 The sa-ttvika mood here explicitly describes the
inverse ﬂow of consciousness from outside where it is engaged with objects,
to the self-nature experienced when turning inwards, the reﬂexive or selfmanifesting consciousness that is inherently blissful. It is noteworthy that the
experiences that are considered sa-ttvika ground corporeality, highlighting that
both the instantaneous experience of rasa and the transcendent experience of
the self as bliss that is felt during the mystical experience are somatic in
nature. This centrality of sa-ttvika experiences in the cultivation of rasa

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

130

Tantric images in light of Rasa theory

highlights corporeality, and at the same time, the two experiences of rasa and
yogic absorption bear many similarities.
The embodied nature of rasa experience is just one aspect of the story.
Classical esthetes such as Abhinava maintained that the esthetic rasa experience is transcendent. Rasa, in this depiction, is inherent to the self which has
the characteristics of bliss and awareness. Just as the smell in soil becomes
pungent when soaked in water, so do rasas manifest when triggered by
vibha-va and so on. This argument of Abhinava provides the much needed
framework to establish that emotions such as disgust and anger can stimulate
fearsome (raudra) or loathsome (bı-bhatsa) rasas.32 The transcendence of rasa
experience makes it irreducible to its causes, for the esthetes such as Abhinava
do not maintain that there is a real cause and eﬀect relation in rasa experience.
This transcendence of rasa experience further supports the claim that both
positive and negative emotions have the same potential to stimulate rasa.

The Man.d.ala of emotions
The discussion above has placed emotions on an equal platform in the sense
that they all have the potential to rise to rasa. Some emotions play a primary
role and others are secondary; nonetheless, they do stimulate esthetic experience.
The experience of disgust or anger is thus within the scope of esthetic bliss.
This position is pivotal in describing Tantric visualization, where emotions,
particularly the negative ones, appear ubiquitous. Guhyasama-ja makes it
explicit that the deities in four corners of the man.d.ala of the Tatha-gatas are
the emanations of the central deity, where the process of embodiment is precisely linked with depicting speciﬁc emotions. Accordingly, Aks.obhya is an
embodiment of hatred (dves.a) inherent to Tatha-gata and so is Vairocana of
delusion (moha) and Lokeśvara of passion (raga). Along the same lines, the
four female counterparts in the man.d.ala are considered an embodiment of
hatred (dves.a), delusion (moha), envy (ı-rs.ya-), and passion (raga).33 These four
emotions have the resonance of the four dormant emotions that are instrumental in instigating the four central rasas. This depiction of emotions in
Guhyasama-ja allows us to further explore the role emotions play in Tantric
visualization, demonstrating the centrality of the three emotions of passion,
hatred, and delusion when the deity man.d.alas became ubiquitous.34 One thing
is explicit in this presentation: if the Tatha-gatas or the deities were devoid of
these emotions, they could not have materialized in the form of peripheral
deities.
There is a direct link between Tantric visualization having a primacy of
emotions and its monistic philosophy that accepts 1. the self or consciousness
as actively engaged in the world, and that 2. the rituals that engage the senses
upon their corresponding objects allow one to recognize the self in its dynamism. In the paradigm where the self is equated with Bhairava and the senses
with the deities surrounding him, sensory engagement and in essence embodied
experiences are intrinsic to the self. Self-realization, in this paradigm, contains

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Tantric images in light of Rasa theory

131

both the mental or cognitive as well as the felt domains. Select divine names
found in Tantric texts make it explicit that the divine body is very much
comprised of emotions. The Tantric philosophy that accepts both transcendence and immanence makes it possible to argue for pure consciousness without
isolating emotions and embodiment from the essential nature of the self. If we
examine the select names of the goddess used to invoke her in the Devıma-ha-tmya (DM), we come to the same conclusion, that emotions that give us
a clear sense of being in the body are also the divine aspects. DM ﬁrst invokes
the goddess as Maha-ma-ya-, the great illusion (DM 1.3, 54), and the same
verse addresses her also as Yoganidra- or the yogic slumber. While
consciousness gives an instant awareness of the separation of the subject from
the body, sleep on the other hand, brings awareness to the body, identifying
the body as the core of being. DM 1.55 further states that this is the
very goddess who brings even the wise ones to delusion. The divine here is not
the one who illumines, but the one who abides in the heart of all and keeps
them in perpetual slumber. The goddess is invoked as the great delusion
(Maha-moha-), great illusion (Maha-ma-ya-), and the great demoness (Maha-surı-)
(DM 1.77). In addition, she is bashfulness (hrı-), and is also identiﬁed as
cognition (buddhi), modesty (lajja-), and forbearance (ks.a-nti) (DM 1.79).
These, nevertheless, are not her only aspects, as she is also invoked as faith
(śraddha-) and modesty (lajja-) (DM 4.5). The text is explicit in invoking the
transcendent in terms of immanence and embodiment while embracing
negative emotions.
The image of the deity is ubiquitously depicted as embodying opposites;
she is a profound paradox. Just as she is identiﬁed as pure consciousness, she is
also embodied and manifests through various emotions. She is found in both
exceedingly peaceful and most ferocious forms (DM 5.13). She is addressed as
consciousness shared by all the sentient beings (DM 5.17–19), and also as
intellect (buddhi), slumber (nidra-), hunger (ks.udha-), vitality (śakti), craving
(tr.s.n.a-), forgiveness (ks.a-nti), modesty (lajja-), peace (śa-nti), faith (śraddha-),
memory (smr.ti), compassion (daya-), satisfaction (tus.t.i), and illusion (bhra-nti)
(DM 5.20–76). Along the same lines, she is invoked as the driving force
behind the sensory faculties (indriya-n.a-m adhis.t.ha-tr.) (DM 5.77). Explicitly,
this is not the isolation of the mind from the body, or concentration upon it,
or the experience of transcendent awareness separated from emotions. The
approach here is to embrace emotions consciously, or, in other words, to ﬁnd
the transcendent nature of consciousness, the experiencing self, while invoking
emotions such as compassion, forgiveness, modesty, and so on. Noteworthy is
the fact that these emotions are not invoked as embodied in the goddess but
as the divinity herself: following the text, the divine is situated in these forms
among all beings.35
According to this description, even the ignorance of the self due to the
darkness of delusion is not out of the scope of pure consciousness (citi). The
transformation of awareness through emotions such as hunger, craving, and
illusion are merely the modalities of awareness (citiru-pa DM 5.78–80).

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

132

Tantric images in light of Rasa theory

Recognition of the self, in this paradigm, is not through the negation of the
emotions that are considered lower. Rather, one recognizes the true nature of
the self through the realization of the immanence of the goddess, or the engaged
presence of consciousness in all modes of emotions. Just as body is a constellation
of consciousness, so also are emotions: being in the body is having bodily
sensations and emotions, and recognition of the divine presence is through the
acknowledgement of emotions and their transformative powers.
The depiction of emotions is central to Tantric imagery, and the very
names of the deities explicitly narrate this centrality of emotion. For instance,
Bhairavas are named as ‘ferocious’ (Can.d.a), ‘anger’ (Krodha), ‘intoxicated with
sexual arousal’ (Unmatta), or ‘fearsome’ (Bhı-s.an.a). One of the main goddesses in the tradition of Tripura- is Ka-meśvarı- or the goddess of desire or
eros. Texts such as Saundaryalaharı- exploit the link of rasas with the goddess
Tripura-, where she is invoked as manifesting all eight rasas simultaneously
(SL 51).36 Beauty and erotic pleasure are essential in all internal and external
domains of worshipping Tripura-. Just like the contrasts between erotic and
disgusting, heroic and timorous, furious and marvelous, and comic and tragic
are vividly portrayed in the discourse on rasa, the diﬀerence in visualization
of Tripura- and Ka-lı- is starkly visible. This contradiction becomes more pronounced in the case of Ca-mun.d.a- who is also invoked as the one with ‘Deformed
Face’ (Vikr.taru-pin.-ı), ‘Pendulous Lips’ (Pralambos.t.hi), ‘Broken Nose’ (Bhagnana-sike), ‘Sunken Face’ (Cipit.a-mukhe), or ‘Owl Face’ (Ulu-kavadana-).37 Where
the ﬂowers being carried by Tripura- express erotism, Ca-mun.d.a- wears entrails,
skulls, and a garland of human hands. Tripura- enjoys wine and Ca-mun.d.adrinks blood, Tripura- sits on a lotus whereas Ca-mun.d.a- rides a corpse, and
Tripura- lives in the lotus grove while Ca-mun.d.a- resides in the cremation
ground. This contrast can also be found in their associates, their vehicle, or
even the background. Zimmer points out that the vehicles of the deities
function as determinants in the process of unraveling esthetic moods (Zimmer
1992: 71).

The divine play of emotions
The interplay of the two disciplines of esthetics and Tantra is explicit in the
ritual visualization of the man.d.alas, where the deities embody rasa experience
by displaying various emotions. At the same time, deity images also relate to
the gradual modes of mystical experience. The display of emotions thus
becomes a language to communicate the state that transcends linguistic discourse. Just as rasa experience is transcendent in its essence while being
revealed by immanent means, the esoteric experience transcends its subject
and object, although being derived through visualizing images. This overlap
between the systems provides us with an opportunity to relate one domain
with the other.
The project of reading images through the lens of emotions is sustained
even by some historical factors. Bharata, the founder of the Indian esthetic

Tantric images in light of Rasa theory

133

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

system, associates diﬀerent deities with particular emotions. His list runs as
follows:
Vis.n.u
Pramatha
Rudra
Yama
Maha-ka-la
Ka-la
Mahendra
Brahma-

.
erotic (sr.nga-ra)
comic (ha-sya)
furious (raudra)
tragic (karun.a)
odious (bı-bhatsa)
terrible (bhaya-naka)
heroic (vı-ra)
marvelous (adbhuta).38

This list makes it clear that early esthetes interpreted rasa as a cosmic play
where various deities correspond to diﬀerent emotions. The relation of Rudra
with fury is explicit, and even the very name of the deity reinforces this link.
The link of Yama to tragic emotion is likewise clear, as Yama is the god of
death. The most fearsome images of Ka-la or Ka-lı- elicit terror or dread. In the
Vedic literature, Indra was associated with heroism. Vis.n.u’s power to manifest
as an enchanting woman (Mohinı-) or his incarnation of Kr.s.n.a demonstrate
Bharata’s coupling of Vis.n.u with erotic sentiment. In essence, this identiﬁcation of deities with emotions is thorough, when we examine the myths and
visualizations of the deities in the list. Tantras borrowed this framework when
systematizing the deity man.d.ala and prescribing visualization. The most
common category to describe their deities is in the group of eight: Sanskrit
syllables are divided into groups of eight; the male (Bhairava) and the female
(Ma-tr.ka-) deities are grouped in eight each, and man.d.alas are constructed with
the most external sphere representing this eightfold grouping. The link
between this categorization with eight emotions is therefore crucial. And this
link is found in a later Tantric text, the Bha-vanopanis.ad:
“The ascertained rasas such as the erotic and the perfections such as
being inﬁnitesimally small [represent] eight energies such as Bra-hmı- that
are comprised of desire, aversion, avarice, delusion, drunkenness, envy,
virtue, and vice.”39
In shifting the discussion from deity images to rituals, just as a drama generates
rasa, a reﬁned cocktail of emotions, by evoking particular emotions and
allowing subjects to transform their sentiments and moods to the transcendent experience that cannot be reduced to any speciﬁc emotion, so also does
visualization allow the viewer to transform their extroverted consciousness
and object-directed pleasure to self-oriented and transcendent bliss. The deity,
in this paradigm, is the luminous body of awareness. With deities expressing
emotions through every gesture and posture, it becomes clear that emotion
and consciousness are inseparably identical. As a consequence, the phenomenal
self can be understood through the prism of emotions, and the liberating

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

134

Tantric images in light of Rasa theory

experience is embodied and in essence, emotional. Through its innate
vibrancy, the self or consciousness engages with emotions by means of the
ﬂow of the senses. Just like the self is equated with the central deity in a
man.d.ala, the sense organs are comparable to the surrounding deities. One can
expand the argument based on the above parallels that the self is in essence
the summation of, and at the same time the enjoyer of all the rasas simultaneously. Not only does this understanding identify consciousness with emotion,
it also grounds the embodied nature of liberating experience. Emotions, while
residing in and being reﬂected in the body, are integral to consciousness.
These emotions evoke, or more literally, ‘suggest’ the transcendent self, of the
nature of bliss and awareness unbound by any speciﬁcity.
In order to ground the argument that emotional experience of the self
(where the self is cognizing the very self as emotions) is integral to Tantric
visualization, I will oﬀer a few examples from common Tantric images. This
will also engage the so-called ‘negative emotions,’ further problematizing the
paradigm where the self is distinct from emotions. Ka-lı-, one of the foremost
deities in Tantra, simultaneously displays various emotions, most of which are
‘negative.’ Her glaring eyes, spiky fangs, and garlands of skulls and snakes
evoke fear; her residence in the cremation ground ﬁlled with rotting ﬂesh, the
company of the canines, and her consumption of entrails and ﬂesh evoke
disgust; her striding atop Śiva and carrying a shiny sword with a freshly
chopped head of a demon depict heroism. The emotions of fury and horror
surround her stage. She, however, is the ‘supreme goddess’ (maha-devı-) identiﬁed
with pure consciousness and the self which in essence is all-encompassing
bliss. This example alone conﬁrms the above arguments that associate emotion
with the self, and the role of negative emotions in cultivating mystical and
esthetic experiences. Accordingly, one cannot actualize the self dissociated
from emotions, as the emotional self is not something to be shunned but to be
recognized. The problem of discrediting emotions, particularly the negative ones,
lies with dualism, and the Tantric tradition under consideration – the Trika,
Kaula, and Śa-kta philosophies – are essentially non-dual. The insights from
Tantric philosophy and rasa esthetics problematize the readings where the role
given to the body and the emphasis upon emotion are marginal. These arguments
are also noteworthy for those advocating a universality of esthetic or mystical
experiences, because the process of cultivating such experiences, and the discussion upon them, are very dissimilar. This reading, however, is congruent
with those who acknowledge the role of cultures in cultivating emotions.
Tantric rituals of visualization epitomize embodied theology and the ﬂuidity
of emotions. Just as many Tantric deities display the emotion of heroism, one
of the Tantric practices instructs the practitioner to cultivate this speciﬁc
emotion by maintaining the mood of heroism (vı-rabha-va). One of the most
popular Śa-kta rituals in India, the worship of Durga- that involves making the
statue of the goddess and participating in the celebratory chariot festival gives
rise to a surge of heroic feeling. The deity imagery suggests the same theme of
the gods subdued by demons and the supreme goddess protecting all three

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Tantric images in light of Rasa theory

135

realms by defeating the demon. While the play of heroism in the act of her
visualization may not be liberating in itself, all emotions including that of
heroism capture Durga-’s phenomenal and transcendent aspects. The rasa
experience here begins with the sensation of heroism and culminates with selfrealization. While not central, the emotions of erotic experience and compassion
are explicit in myths and visualizations of the goddess. The celebration of the
goddess with dance, chants, and her display in the chariot, all evoke heroism,
with subordinate emotions eliciting this central emotion. If the self were
devoid of emotion, the Śa-kta paradigm of the centrality of Durga-, whose
essence is heroic emotion, would be inconsistent.
In the practice of Bhairava, fear becomes instrumental to liberation. As his
.
other names suggest, he is after all ‘fearsome’ (Bhı-s.an.a, Bhayankara). The
name Bhairava comes from his fearsome howl. His glaring eyes are frightening,
and his large dark body with snakes, skulls, and the hides of elephant and
tiger heightens the viewer’s sense of fear. Transforming fear through experiencing its concentrated image as Bhairava is the basis of the practice. The
metaphors of the cremation ground and night suggest death: when visualizing
Bhairava, the real gaze is upon death. While the central mood experienced
here is fear, this experience of fear is nonetheless conducive to self-realization, as
the course of practice culminates with Bhairava standing for the self, transcending fear and death. The visible image or the emotions displayed are, in
this sense, a gateway to its opposite: the journey that started with fear ends by
transcending it. The centrality of the esthetic mood of fear (bhaya-naka)
is vivid in all forms of Bhairava practice. Just as the image of Durga- displays
heroism along with other subordinate emotions, Bhairava’s imagery portrays
fury (raudra), disgust (bı-bhatsa), and heroism (vı-ra). Often invoked in a pair,
Ka-lı- and Bhairava bear many similar characteristics. These are also the central
deities of Trika, the non-dual stream of Tantric practice. The embodiment of
death at the end signiﬁes immortality, as is vivid in the practice of Ka-lı-.
Bhairava’s journey begins with fear and culminates with fearlessness. These
deities, following the philosophy of Abhinava, are mirror images of the self.
This embodiment of negative emotions in the course of transcending them
problematizes the theologies that view the divine only in positive terms. This
also brings negative emotions from the periphery to the center.
Bhairava images bring to prominence the expressions of heroism, wrath,
and fear. The Buddhist Tantric deity Heruka depicts similar meanings by
embodying multiple emotions: his eyes suggest delusion, his ears are linked
with anger, the mouth with greed, the nose with miserliness, and the torso
with jealousy.40 The imagery of Cakrasam
. vara Heruka is detailed in such
a way that the deity manifests one or another emotion through various gestures
and weapons. For instance, the deity’s two weapons, the thunderbolt and bell,
held in the uppermost hands, are described as signifying emptiness and compassion. His two arms embracing the goddess (Vajrava-ra-hı-) suggest power
and wisdom, and the raw elephant hide held by the next two arms represents
ignorance. The dagger of the deity depicts the removal of pride. His staﬀ

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Figure 6.1 Durga- Mahis.a-suramardinı-

Figure 6.2 Ca-mun.d.a-

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Tantric images in light of Rasa theory

137

signiﬁes supreme bliss. The head of Brahma- that the deity carries displays his
control over delusion. The deity subdues time and death, shown by striding
atop two dark and red ﬁgures. The dark and subordinated ﬁgure, Yama, also
indicates duality, and the deity that dominates him becomes a metaphor of
non-duality. The gem that ties the deity’s hair indicates fulﬁllment of all desires
and the crescent moon the deity wears signiﬁes the Bodhi mind. Bhairava’s
frowning face and tightly clenched teeth are the metaphors of overcoming
negative emotions. The tiger hide covering the deity’s body suggests his heroism.
In the same way, the skull cup ﬁlled with blood and held in Vajrava-ra-hı-’s left
hand signiﬁes supreme bliss and her nudity is interpreted as her victory over
passion.41
Central to the imagery of Ca-mun.d.a- is the emotion of disgust (bı-bhatsa)
and the goddess is visualized wearing a garland of heads. The argument of the
non-dual Tantras is not just to identify the goddess with negative emotion,
but also to identify her with the self, and along these lines, the self is embodied
and emotions are integral to it. It is not that the experience of disgust is
considered liberating, but that the awareness of the self while undergoing
emotional states grants the liberating wisdom. When transformed into rasa,
even the experience of disgust (bı-bhatsa) has the primacy of sattva. What
constitutes negativity in experiencing emotions is not the emotions per se but
the basic moods that underly these experiences. This justiﬁes encountering
Ca-mun.d.a as enlightening. In other words, in all transformations, experience
and the self are identical and the awareness of the self is embodied and enriched
with emotions, whether negative or positive. The corporeal depiction of Ca-mun.d.aas wearing entrails, consuming blood, fat, and meat, and riding a corpse, all
elicit disgust, and like other images, she also evokes other emotions that are
subordinate. Not only does this paradigm consider emotional growth as integral
to spiritual progress, it also supports the claim that self and emotion are
inseparable. Just like a calm ocean still holds the potential of the tsunami,
negative emotions are not eradicated from the enlightened self, and just like
the tides indicate the wind, emotions describe the active engagement of the self.
Another popular Tantric imagery is that of Chinnamasta-, whose visualization
powerfully brings multiple emotions into action. The goddess stands astride a
couple in amorous play, depicting erotic sentiment. She severs her own head,
depicting heroism. She feeds her subordinates with her own blood, depicting
compassion. Her action of severing her head and the three ﬂows of blood
oozing out also stimulates the emotion of perplexity (adbhuta). The very act
of self-beheading also stimulates the emotion of fear. The emotions of disgust
and anger can be generated by the sight of oozing blood, the spectacle of the
goddess severing her own head, her companions celebrating her decapitation,
and the ensuing bloodshed. The characters in this visualization, the couple in
amorous play, her associates, and particularly the goddess herself, are smiling,
depicting comic sentiment. The image of a deity, following this argument, is
the constellation of emotions that are expressed in their true form, the selfnature, when expressed as rasa. In rasa experience, there is no simultaneous

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

138

Tantric images in light of Rasa theory

Figure 6.3 Chinnamasta-

experience of various permanent moods, as one subordinates the other. In
mystical experience, they all arise simultaneously as subordinate to a higher
experience. In this process, ﬁrst the emotions are turned into rasa experience,
and then this experience is elevated, prolonging the duration of a single
stream of thought-qua-emotion, eventually turning into bliss-awareness.
The images of deities, in the rasa paradigm, function to carry out two roles:
one to invoke the inner rasa experience through external stimuli and in this case,
their functioning is similar to any esthetic object, and the next is to transform
that rasa experience to the experience of the absolute, Brahman. Following this
perspective, the external support of visualization, a man.d.ala for instance,
merely invokes inner states, allowing the practitioner to encounter the mirrorimage of the self. External stimuli are experienced in fragments in either case,
and thus the complete artwork is subjective: here, real visualization occurs. In
the realized state, there is no experience that is not part of the very absolute,
and so there is actually no dichotomy between the two. The diﬀerence, however,
is in complete transformation in the case of mystical experience, while a
simple rasa experience is less powerful in transforming psycho-somatic
conditions of the experiencing subject. When reported, the esoteric experience
occurring through visualization is still a rasa experience. However, it liberates
the subject from external stimuli and the subject is not dependent upon the
visualized object for the surge of elevated bliss, and he is able to regenerate

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Tantric images in light of Rasa theory

139

this experience even in the absence of external stimuli. Understanding visualization allows one to recognize the harmony between esthetic rasa experience
and the experience of the transcendent that is expressed through the divine
images. Visualization, in this light, is not merely conjuring an image or relating
it to abstract concepts, it is also an active engagement with archetypal emotions.
All emotions in this elevated consciousness function as tools for enlightenment: the same emotions that tie ordinary consciousness to name and form
and evoke passion or aversion also allow the reversal of gaze, turning towards
the self. Deities such as Ka-lı- or Bhairava, along these lines, not only display
emotions but also suggest that the viewers incorporate their emotions and
experience liberation while being engaged in the world. Since the deities are
repeatedly addressed as identical to the self in the non-dual paradigm, the
emotions the deities display are not outside the self. Visualization, thus, aims
to give the insight of the self while witnessing the play of emotions amid the
turmoil of emotions.
The image of Ka-meśvarı- – the goddess of desire and the controlling energy
of the world – uniquely depicts the interplay of the self, consciousness, and
emotion. The goddess is invoked as Sundarı-, the beautiful one, and she
suggests eroticism through her posture and gestures. With her two arms, she
carries a sugarcane bow and ﬁve arrows comprised of ﬁve diﬀerent ﬂowers,
and with the other two, she carries the goad that controls and the noose that
binds. Even the deities invoked in her man.d.ala, such as ‘she who enchants
all’ (Sarvasammohinı-), ‘she who entrances all’ (Sarvastambhinı-), and ‘she
.
who controls all’ (Sarvavaśankarı-), suggest her hypnotizing qualities. The
Bha-vanopanis.ad equates Ka-meśvara, the consort of goddess Ka-meśvarı-, with
pure consciousness and the very self, eternally ﬁlled with bliss.42 Following
this text, Ka-meśvarı-, also invoked as Lalita-, is portrayed as having a red hue
and wearing red garments; the color describes the reﬂective aspect of awareness.43
The same text describes that her bow made of sugarcane refers to the mind,
passion (ra-ga) is suggested by the rope that binds, aversion (dves.a) is suggested
by the goad the deity carries, and the ﬁve sense organs are indicated by the
ﬁve arrows that the goddess holds.44 The centrality of erotic emotion is vivid
in Bhagama-linı-, the goddess who wears the garland of wombs and Nityaklinna-,
the eternally aroused goddess, two other emanations of Tripura-.45 With heroism
subordinate to eroticism, the imagery of the goddess exempliﬁes tender emotions
and their role in the transformation of the self.
Just as the contrast between passion (ra-ga) and aversion (dves.a) is essential
in the discourse on rasa, so also is it central in deciphering Tantric images.
The imagery of Ka-lı- vividly portrays aversion, contrasting the imagery of
Tripura- that displays passion. The term ra-ga in Sanskrit stands not only for
passion, but also for the color red, and the goddess Tripura- is red in hue. Ka-lı-’s
dark body portrays the darkness of tamas that gives rise to negative emotions. She
is additionally invoked as ta-ması-, or the one ﬁlled with tamas. She is Maha-ma-ya-,
the cosmic ‘delusion’ (moha) who projects externality. At the same time, she
also stands for the self identiﬁed with pure consciousness. When examining

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

140

Tantric images in light of Rasa theory

the posture of Tripura-, her erotic gestures, shocking lust, amorously depicted
body portrayed as red, completely clothed and youthful, her swelling breasts,
all express passion. And she is nonetheless the goddess of liberation.
As explained above, emotions are not obstacles on the way to liberation but
the very manifestation of the self to be actualized. This thesis extends also to
the emotion of experiencing tragedy that the goddess Dhu-ma-vatı- portrays. The
underlying myth of the hunger of the goddess, who, in her wrath mixed with
hunger, eats her consort Śiva, and the image of her roaming as a widow with her
pitiful face, brings tragedy to the spotlight. While tragic emotion is at the center,
the peripheral emotions of anger, disgust, and fear accompany the imagery. She
can metonymically suggest hunger. What is essential to this discourse is, she is
nonetheless the goddess of wisdom (Maha-vidya-), capable of granting liberation.
This entire visualization of deities, particularly those depicting negative emotions,
would not be meaningful, if the self were devoid of emotion. The paradigm of
rasa allows us to address this in the proper light: emotions, even when eliciting
pain, help cultivate self-awareness. The self, following this paradigm, does not
exclude either emotions or the body.
This discussion allows us to reach the following conclusions. One, the paradigm
of rasa facilitates addressing opaque Tantric images that are otherwise diﬃcult
to understand. Two, emotion and the self or consciousness do not constitute a
polarity, but rather, they are one and the same entity manifest in diﬀerent
modes. Three, the dualistic model discredits emotions in the discourse of the
self and dissociates embodiment from consciousness. A proper counter to this
theory lies in Tantric visualization and the rasa theory. Finally, just as there
are various emotions, particularly those found in the rasa experience that are
culturally and linguistically construed, the assumptions regarding the self
are also grounded on culture, and self-realization involves actualization of this
embodied and emotional aspect of the self. Just as reading Tantric images
through the lens of rasa unravels deeper aspects of visualization, engaging
Tantric philosophy in the discourse on emotion allows us to explore the
relation of the self and emotions and to address negative emotions in a
proper light.

Notes
1 For the study of the esthetic and the mystical aspects in Abhinavagupta’s literature,
see Cuneo 2006, and Gnoli (1956)’s ‘Aesthetic Experience.’
2 For emotion and metaphor, see Emanatian 1995: 163–82; and Kövecses 1990.
3 K.C. Pandey’s (1963) classic work is still the most detailed study of the contributions
of Abhinavagupta. The study and translation of Dhvanya-loka by Ingalls, Masson, and
Patwardhan is another essential study of the classical Indian esthetics in modern
scholarship. Besides the works of Abhinavagupta and Anandavardhana, I have
.
utilized works by Viśvanatha (Sahityadarpan.a), and Jaganna-tha (Rasaganga-dhara)
for this discussion. For discussion on rasa in light of Tantras, see Skora 2007a,
2007b, 2009; and Timalsina 2007.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Tantric images in light of Rasa theory

141

4 For discussion on rasa theory, see Devy 2002; Ballantyne and Dasa Mitra
1994; and Raghavan 1967. For discussion on dhvani, see Ingalls et al. 1990; and
Pandey 1963. For a general discourse on rasa, see Honeywell 1969: 165–76;
Gerow and Aklujkar 1972: 80–87; Gitomer 2000: 219–36; Bhattacharya 1935:
237–47; Burke 1973; de Sousa 1987; Gerow 1994: 186–208; Ingalls 1963; Ingalls
et al. 1990; Hanks 1996; Kosambi and Gokhale 1957; Krishnamoorthy 1974:
114–36; Malamoud 1982: 33–54; McCrea 1997; Pollock 1998: 117–92; and Pollock
2003.
5 For religion and rasa, see Wulﬀ 1984, 1986; Larson 1976; Walton 2007: 31–41; and
Stange 1984: 113–34. For rasa and art, see Mukerjee 1965: 91–96.
6 Although bha-va cannot always be translated as emotion and even the concept of
emotion is not well deﬁned in contemporary philosophy, I am considering bha-va as
emotion in a very general sense, and by bha-va, I am primarily referring to the
stha-yı--bha-vas.
7 For dı-vya, vı-ra, and paśu bha-vas, see Puraścarya-rn.ava, vol. 3, pages 277–88 (in
Rana 1972).
8 For terms including bha-va that apply to the states of possession, see Smith 2006:
113, 120, 356.
9 Madhusu-dana Sarasvatı-’s Bhagavad-bhakti-rasa-yana is one of the central texts that
identiﬁes the devotional practice of bhakti as rasa. In the Vais.n.avite context, Ru-pa
Gosva-mı-’s works (1937 and 1961) are noteworthy. For the liturgical expression of
emotions in Bhakti traditions, see Timm 1991: 59–75.
10 For bhakti as the ﬁnal goal of life (paramapurus.a-rtha), see Nelson 2004: 345–92.
11 For discussion, see Larson 1976: 375.
12 Locana in Ingalls et al. 1990: 222: lines 16–20.
13 Puraścarya-rn.ava, vol. 3, pages 248–76 (in Rana 1972) for various orders linked
with diﬀerent deity visualizations.
14 For some contemporary studies on metaphor and emotions, see Kövecses 1986,
2000, 2005; and Forceville 2005.
15 Following Jaganna-tha’s presentation, Abhinavagupta maintains that rasa is the
dormant mental imprint or ‘perfume’ (… pra-gvinivis.t.ava-sana-ru-po ratya-dir eva
rasah. | RG 1:88) left by the emotion of love, etc. The permanent mood (sta-yıbha-va) such as love is considered rasa also by Mammat.a in his Ka-vyapraka-śa by
saying that ‘stha-yı- bha-vo rasah. smr.tah. |’ Jaganna-tha deﬁnes rasa as ‘the permanent
mood such as love qualiﬁed by the consciousness with its conditioning factors
destroyed’ (bhagna-varan.acidviśis.t.a- ratya-dih. stha-yı- bha-vo rasah.). RG 1:96.
16 The debate over the number of rasas is an old one and is covered in Raghavan
1940. Abhinavagupta brieﬂy summarizes the positions regarding the manifestation
of rasas in his Dhvanya-loka-Locana (DAL), Chapter 2. Texts such as Ka-vyapraka-śa,
. Kavyadarśa, or Rasagangadhara are noteworthy in their contribution to this classical
debate.
17 Many studies have emerged after Pandey 1959. Select studies include Masson and
Patwardhan 1969; Nandi 1973; Gerow 1994: 186–208; and Chaudhury 1965b. For
engaging the philosophical aspect of dhvani, see Amaladass 1984. On rasa and
general poetics, see Honeywell 1969: 165–76.
18 For comparative studies on rasa, see Higgins 2007; Chaudhury 1965b: 151–63;
Wadia 1981: 71–77; Schechner 2001: 27–50; Patankar 1980; Hussain and
Wilkinson 2006; Gerow 2002; Thampi 1965; Chari 1976: 287–99; and Hogan 1996:
164–78.
- 19 See SD 3.131c-133b. For deﬁnition, see: tatra vibha-vanam
. ratyader viśes.en.asva.
da-nkuran.ayogyata-nayanam | anubha-vanam evam
. bhutasya ratyadeh. samanantaram
- eva rasa-diru-pataya- bha-vanam | sañca-ran.am
. tathabhutasyaiva tasya samyak caran.am |
Viśvana-tha’s auto-commentary on SD 3.13. See also: va-sana-ru-pataya-tisu-ks.mar
- u-pen.a-vasthita-n ratya-dı-n stha-yinah. vibha-vayanty a-sva-dayogyata-m
. nayantıti vibhavah.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

142

Tantric images in light of Rasa theory

| ratya-dı-n stha-yino ‘nubha-vanayty anubha-vavis.ayı-kurvantı-ty anubha-va-h. | samyak
.
(sarva-ngavya-pitaya-) ratya-dı-n ka-ye ca-rayanti sañca-rayanti muhur muhur
abhivyañjayantı-ti va- sañca-rin.a iti | Laks.mı- commentary in SD, page 69.
.
20 Daśaru-paka IV, 34; and verses quoted by Jaganna-tha in Rasaganga-dhara I, stha-yıbha-valaks.an.am. Translation by Chari in Chari 1976: 289.
21 This classiﬁcation follows Dhvanya-loka 3.24 and Locana commentary thereon. See
Ingalls et al. 1990: 506.
22 The issue of what is primary among the rasas is essential to the relation of self and
rasas. For instance, if being in repose in the self, with distancing all the manifest
emotional states, is viewed as central, then śa-nta becomes primary, and if desire is
.
considered to be central to the self, sr.nga-ra becomes central.
23 bahyameyavimukhatapadakah. kaścanantaro dharmah. sattvam | (SD, page 72, lines 1–2).
24 The Laks.mı- commentary gives the example of prapa-n.akarasa to describe the
unitary nature of rasa experience (SD, page 72, lines 27–28).
25 bodhyanis.t.ha- yatha-svam
. te sukhaduh.khadihetavah. | bodhr.nis.t.has tu sarve ‘pi
sukhama-traikahetava || Bhagavadbhaktirasa-yana 3.5.
26 samu-ha-lambana-tmaika- ja-yate sa-ttvikı- matih. | sa-nantaraks.an.e ‘vaśyam
. vyanakti
sukham uttamam || Bhagavadbhaktirasa-yana 3.12cd–13ab.
27 Viśvana-tha explains esthetic wonder as: camatka-raś cittavista-raru-po
vismaya-paraparyya-yah. | SD, page 72, line 6.
28 tena na pratı-yate notpadyate na-bhivyajyate ka-vyena rasah. | Locana in DA 2.4.
29 tebhyaś ca surate dantaghatadibhya iva sukham eva jayate | SD page 77, line
10–page 78, line 1.
30 Na-t.yaśa-stra 6.22.
31 For instance, Śa-ktavijña-na details various corporeal symptoms of the rise of Śakti.
See Silburn 1988: 121–23.
32 For discussions on raudra rasa, see Gitomer 2003: 219–36.
33 For the Tatha-gataman.d.ala, see Guhyasama-jatantra, Chapter 1.
34 Among the weapons of Tripurasundarı-, the rope (pa-śa) is equated with passion
(ra-ga) and the goad with aversion (dves.a). The two aspects of ra-ga and dves.a are
worshipped in two sides of the Bhagama-linı- man.d.ala.
35 The repeated phrase, ‘ya- devı- sarvabhu-tes.u … ru-pen.a sam
. sthita’ (DM 5.14–73),
highlights the transformation of the divine in these cognitive and emotional aspects
and makes the divine as immanent.
36 For various commentaries on Saundaryalaharı-, see Kuppuswami 1991. For the
studies on Saundaryalaharı-, see Brown 1958; Subrahmanian 1977; Clooney 2005;
and Timalsina 2014 (forthcoming).
37 These identiﬁcations are found in Padama-la-mantra. See Gupta in Harper and
Brown 2002: 231–49.
38 Na-t.yaśa-stra 6.44–45.
.
39 niyatiśr.nga-ra-dayo rasa- an.ima-disiddhayah. ka-makrodhalobhamohamadama-tsar
yapun.yapa-pamayyo bra-hmya-dy as.t.aśaktayah. || Bha-vanopanis.ad, stanza 11.
40 Dawa-samdup 1919: 7.
41 Lokesh Chandra in Dawa-samdup 1919: 22–29 (preface).
42 nirupa-dhikı-sam
. vid eva kameśvarah. || sadanandapurn.ah. svatmaiva paradevata lalita ||
Bhavanopanis.ad, stanzas 26–27.
43 lauhityam etasya sarvasya vimarśah. || Bha-vanopanis.ad, stanza 27.
.
44 śabda-ditanma-tra-h. pañcapus.paba-n.a-h. || mana iks.udhanuh. || ra-gah. pa-śah. || dves.o’nkuśah. ||
Bhavanopanis.ad 21–24.
45 Fashioned in the image of Tripura-, the image of the Buddhist Tantric deity Kurukullasuggests passion and amorous desire with her glowing red color. Her bewitching
powers help subjugate enemies, and emotions are quelled for the yogin. Kurukullais depicted as sitting on Ka-ma and Rati, the amorous couple, who repeatedly
appear as devotees of Tripura- as well (Shaw 2006: 432–47).

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

7

Conclusions

Tantras pay equal attention to visual forms as they do to their linguistic
expression. Their private and public practices are suﬀused with images and they
demonstrate an internal systematic organization of visual forms to express
speciﬁc concepts and emotions. This work has therefore been dedicated
to exploring the nuances of images in Tantric culture with some broad
generalization applicable to understanding the larger visual culture. Moving
beyond the works of Charles Sanders Pierce, Umberto Eco, Don Ihde, and other
philosophers who have worked on visual hermeneutics, this work analyzes the
cognitive and emotional domains of images in order to excavate meaning
embedded within culture. The articulation and institutionalization of meaning
stands as an integral part of cultural existence and revival. Therefore the
chapters above are dedicated to establishing a dialogue between the Indian
material culture and the emerging ﬁeld of cognitive science. Semiotic expression,
utilized herein as the basic building blocks of meaning in images, is vivid in every
aspect of addressing Tantric images, and this tendency is epitomized in the
emic readings of the limbs and seats of deities.1 The chapters above demonstrate
how cultural dialogue is possible through the exchange of forms and how
cultures have expressed their concerns through images in the internal semiotic
shift. Many other aspects of addressing visual culture, even within Tantras,
have not been discussed in this text, and it remains a task for future research.
This work also comes in commemoration of the shift towards the study of
image and imagination in contemporary scholarly discourse. The dominant
framework for addressing religions, shaped primarily by Semitic cultures and
an analytic philosophical tradition, has isolated itself from engaging images in
any meaningful way. The resurgent study of forms in cognitive sciences and
phenomenological research has given the much-needed space for this analysis,
and again, this is for future scholarship to explore various cognitive and
emotional domains of the culture of visualization.
Most importantly, contemplative practices with images at the core allow us
to analyze the role imagination plays in various cognitive and emotional
activities. There is an imprint of imagination in every mode of cognition.
While this could be considered detrimental to various forms of realism, the
prominence of imagination as a category in Indian philosophical traditions

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

144

Conclusions

complements this study for understanding human cognitive behavior that
involves images. Contrary to naïve or uninformed speculation, images in these
cultures are the means for subjects to enhance their capacity of imagination,
strengthen attention, and organize memory. This reshaping of diﬀerent cognitive
domains through the manipulation of images in contemplative practice is a
subject of the utmost interest for furthering our knowledge in the arena of
human consciousness where the phenomenological evidence is more decisive
than a mere lab experiment.
Arguments in the previous chapters also point in the direction of an
epistemology developed and grounded in culture itself. The analysis of metonymic and metaphoric systems, holographic cultural expression found in Tantric
visualization, and the cultivation of emotions in visualization practices as epitomized in the culture of rasa all point in the same direction – that cultures
shape basic cognitive and emotional responses, and contemplative practices
reshape everyday experience by remapping cognitive processes. Culture, along
these lines, is both shaped by, and instrumental in, shaping human experience.
A much-needed focus for future studies, in accordance with the research in
the above chapters, is a cultural epistemology with an equal focus on folk
theories and visual culture. Rituals and images are crucial in the Indian cultural
imagination, and the cultural self is engrained with the experiences cultivated
in this process. The role of collective and personal memory, the organization
of self-experience and ﬁnding oneself as a social subject, and the multiple
responses to diﬀerent emotions that are ingrained with speciﬁc cultural
expectations, are all vivid in the above examination of Tantric images. The
previous chapters have outlined the fundamental building blocks for studying
the role of images in cultural experience, starting from the basic morphology of
images, the use of metonymy to analyze complex emotions, to understanding
the emotional domain of images. Findings in these chapters are consistent
with the argument that our everyday experiences are shaped by culture and
perceptual, emotional, and cognitive domains share cultural underpinnings.
This book diﬀers from mainstream cultural and religious studies that primarily
focus on socio-historical aspects. Besides reading cultures as organizing forces
for socio-political transactions, a more fruitful discourse can emerge by reading
cultures to understand the ways human experiences are shaped and maintained. Understanding what a Tantric does in isolation from society in his
meditation room or cremation ground may be socially less productive than
understanding the ways human cognition is constructed and maintained
through contemplative practices, with religious and secular experiences sharing
the broader cultural underpinnings. Tantric textual and visual culture primarily
focus on bringing images to mind, and it is mind-boggling that this aspect has
generated little attention in mainstream academe. I have endeavored only to
demonstrate that an alternative reading to cultural artifacts has a broad and
unrealized potential. For this to occur, cultural studies needs to pay equal
if not more attention to phenomenological and cognitive approaches while
liberating the discipline from its colonial legacy.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Conclusions

145

Although written texts and folk rituals have gained some attention in contemporary studies, the issue of images remains in oblivion. What we see in the
ﬁeld, though, is that all Tantric practices without exception involve one or
another form of visualization. Various terms like imagination (kalpana-),
memory (smaran.a), and meditation (dhya-na) come in the context of bringing
to the mental space various geometric or deity images, and these practices are
integral to Tantric rituals. Without properly addressing images, Tantric culture
remains opaque. Contemporary studies that isolate these domains have, in
eﬀect, created a new culture that aligns with the reader’s preconceptions
rather than the reader gaining insight from the cultures being examined.
I have adopted an integrated approach to studying cultures by incorporating
both the etic and emic perspectives. Even the most systematic philosophies for
analyzing cultural experiences born out of indigenous cultures are viewed by
the social scientists today as subordinate to their own framework that is
foreign to the presuppositions of the cultures being examined. This has added
more confusion than understanding. I have addressed only select aspects of
visualization and the culture of images, and the ﬁrst among these approaches
is reading Tantric images as part of mnemonic practice. Besides their role in
cultivating mystical experience and altering the states of consciousness, Tantric
images meet the criteria for mnemonic devices, since these are used to bring
to mind a wider system of beliefs or broader philosophical categories. The
opacity of images is vivid throughout the entire Indian culture, whether the
image is of Gan.eśa with an elephant head and a mouse for a ride, or of Ka-lıwith her graphic presence. As mnemonic devices, these images are meaningful,
bring to the subject’s mind broader cultural and philosophical categories, and
thus can be the subject of scholarly discourse.
Contemporary research on the relationship between image and speech can be
matched with the contemplative practices that have much to oﬀer in understanding the cognitive activities of attention, memory, or recognition. Tantric
practitioners do not merely focus on mental images, they also evoke a wide
range of meaning while manipulating and integrating forms and bringing the
icons to life. Cognitively, it is of the utmost interest to know when a piece of
imagination stops being imagination, projected outside by the subject with an
awareness of the object as his fancy, and starts being reality for that subject,
giving him the conviction that the images in his mind are real. This study has
only begun to address these questions.
This research on Tantric visual culture has established that it consistently
relies on metonymic and metaphoric structures in constructing and deciphering the imagery. From a basic image to the most complex ones with multiple
heads and hands and with a series of seats, images are suggesting something
and the language in these contexts is that of metonymy and metaphor.
Thanks to contemporary advances in linguistics, semiotics, cognitive science,
and phenomenology, we now know that metaphor and metonymy are not
merely poetic devices but are the basic tools we use in everyday cognitive
activities. I have attempted only to demonstrate in the chapters on metonymy

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

146

Conclusions

and metaphor that these processes have enriched cultural experience, Tantric
or otherwise. The above analysis demonstrates that the cultivation of esthetic or
mystical experience while encountering images has a cultural underpinning, and
the meaning embedded within forms can be deciphered by systematically
analyzing metonymic and metaphoric devices. For both metaphor and metonymy,
we need to activate multiple domains for making a cognitive link. What this
implies is that some cognitive activities are presumed prior to metaphoric and
metonymic thinking. More studies are required to analyze the ways unique
experiences are made and transmitted throughout cultures, shaping personal and
collective identities, and enabling the individual and society to function. What
is clear is that imagination and imaging in particular play a pivotal role in
these cultural transactions.
Tantric embodied practices and visualizations constitute an intricate relationship between our body schema and body image. How the society cultivates
an embodied subject or the body-self depends on the process whereby the
individual places his body-parts in an imagined space and updates this
schema during corporeal movement. It is evident that body schema is
dynamic, and cultural parameters and contemplative practices can have a
direct role in shaping the understanding of our embodiment. The image body,
or the bodies viewed as divine or human in Tantric practices, have a clear and
unmistakable inﬂuence in the body schema, and this relation can be further
studied by examining Tantric visual culture with a focus on embodied visualization practices and their transformative role in subject’s aﬃrmation of
embodied experiences.
Tantric images cannot be localized in a single historical time or attributed
to a single artist. Even with the embedded multiplicity of worldviews, these
images have continued to mean something for the viewers nonetheless. Each
of the deity images is an archive in itself, and one can explore Mikhail
Bakhtin’s concept of sedimentation, with layers of new meanings embedded
with the earlier ones, having diﬀerent meanings for diﬀerent times and viewers. I have attempted only to outline some salient features when exploring
Tantric images. The implications, however, are universal, as the same process
is visible in any aspect of the material culture. Thousands of deities with
millions of forms narrate a single theme of shaping and sustaining cultural
experience. With further studies, I hope that a universal language of imagery
can be established, or that the basic patterns in our metonymic thinking can
be deciphered.
Embodied experiences are at the core of metonymic and metaphoric
thinking. Rather than metaphors being a conscious cognitive process of integrating diﬀerent inputs from diﬀerent sources, it makes sense that this integration
occurs pre-cognitively. The animation of images and integration of multiple
domains in visualizing meaning aid our understanding of this process of
constructing metonyms and metaphors. It is explicit in the examples above
that basic concepts are spatialized so that something abstract can be mapped
in the mental space by borrowing aspects from the external space. Classical

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Conclusions

147

Indian discourse on laks.an.a- or indication is a good place to start categorizing
such structures beneath our concepts. Although a signiﬁcant amount of work
has been done in cognitive linguistics, parallel Indian theories have not been
equally explored. They are signiﬁcant, not only to understand the culture
being studied but also because their precise analysis of particular cognitive
linguistic or emotional aspects have the potential to advance our current
understanding of consciousness and emotion. My attempt in the above chapters
is only cursory and suggests the need for further exploration in Indian literary
theories in light of contemporary cognitive science.
Tantric visualization relies primarily on orientational and conceptual metaphors. Images are structured in relation to each other, and in the process of
embedding new meanings within the imagery, many of the concepts are
borrowed from existing Vedic and other Indian cultures. These metaphors and
metonyms map reality through embodied experience, and in this way the
body becomes a yardstick for measuring reality. Entities are cognized in
relation to distinctive body-parts, and diﬀerent human activities are mapped
in relation to the referent limbs. This is where the imaginary body becomes
important, as it is not just the real body that gives structure to metaphoric
thinking, but also the imagined body, the body that we aspire to have, or the
body gloriﬁed by the culture being examined. For example, the binary metaphors of ‘illumination’ (praka-śa) and ‘reﬂective awareness’ (vimarśa) describe
the ways the target in the metaphor borrows from multiple sources. Philosophies,
such as Trika, Spanda, or Pratyabhijña-, in addition to the Siddha-nta and
various other Śaivite traditions, are thus inseparably intertwined with cultural
expression, and the contemporary studies of Tantric culture that isolate Tantric
philosophies from their practice thus rely on faulty assumptions.
What underlies these metonymic and metaphoric structures is conceptual
integration or blending, as Fauconnier has termed. Borrowing diﬀerent inputs
from our experience and creating a structure that is entirely new and additional to the inputs is common to the evolution of human consciousness. This
process is vivid in Tantric visualization where new images are created by
borrowing aspects from other images. Deities with ﬁve heads and ten arms,
for instance, depict the aspects of ﬁve diﬀerent divinities simultaneously. Some
images integrate diﬀerent modes of time by depicting diﬀerent events at the
same time. Mapping diﬀerent spaces is quite common: a man.d.ala stands for
the cosmos with diﬀerent heavenly bodies corresponding to diﬀerent divinities
being mapped in a single image. The most exalted among Tantric philosophies, the system of Pratyabhijña-, weaves everyday experiences with the
broader agenda of self-realization, and instances of consciousness are viewed
in this paradigm as similar to the rays of the sun. The self, the central deity,
or the center in a man.d.ala, all stand for this transcendent reality that makes
the immanent possible. Conceptual integration is also essential in developing
philosophy itself, as the Pratyabhijña- philosophy demonstrates, with the
founding philosophers’ (such as Soma-nanda’s) reliance on preexisting
Siddha-nta texts, or elementary concepts borrowed from earlier literature. The

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

148

Conclusions

order in which Tantric visual culture has evolved is matched with the process
of systematizing Tantric philosophies. The medieval development of Śa-kta
traditions, with Tripura- being the ultimate Śa-kta divinity, explains the same
phenomenon – the absorption of existing perspectives and images within a
single narrative, where the new image or perspective transcends the existing
forms and concepts while weaving the preexisting perspectives within a single
rubric. Conceptual blend has much to oﬀer in understanding of the development of both Tantric images and philosophies. This process of synthesis is
also at the center of rasa, and exploring the ways rasa theory has been analyzed
is relevant for furthering our knowledge of cultivating complex emotions.
Since rasa is a culmination of the Indian philosophy of theatrics, further
research in this direction is meaningful for developing a hermeneutics of
visual culture.
While on one hand the synthetic process of conceptual integration is pivotal
to developing the culture of visualization, an understanding of the holographic
nature of consciousness is equally central to weaving diﬀerent practices and
beliefs into a system. Congruent with holographic epistemology, when bodyparts are analyzed in the Hindu myths, these limbs are treated as complete
bodies. This brings the conceptual framework back to the embodied state, as
most of the part-whole analysis rests on the individual’s understanding of his
body. A new form of epistemology is thus needed to address this cultural and
contemplative experience that relies on perceiving reality as integral, with
every single aspect of existence interpenetrating and interdependent, and
mind and body as two extensions of the same being.
If embodiment is central to our conceptualization of the world and the
visualization practices in Tantras reinforce this philosophy, then it is essential
to address the role emotions play in these practices. This is where four diﬀerent
approaches collectively contribute to our knowledge. The ﬁrst is, the
exploration of indigenous practices, rituals in particular, which display an
euphoric expression of emotions, be it heroism or horror. Second, the classical
Indian theory of rasa grounds transcendental experiences in the mundane
terms of the play of emotions. Three, contemporary cognitive and psychological
theories of emotion facilitate the process of addressing the cultivation of
speciﬁc emotions in the transforming modes of rituals. Finally, Indian philosophical systems oﬀer essential feedback that can synthesize these diverse
perspectives which do not follow the oppositional binary of the body and
mind embedded within Western philosophy and culture. Tantric Kaula philosophy equates kula with the body, initiating the discourse on philosophical
categories by relying on the body. The Trika system, the basis of the philosophy of Abhinava, gives the triadic imagery of the goddess Para-, Para-para-,
and Apara-, as the basis of the central emotional states. The embodied self is also
the emotional self and the consciousness addressed by engaging the body also
presupposes emotions. Recognition of the self, along these lines, is not a dissociation of the embodied and emotional domains of the self. On the contrary, the self that is recognized is very much embodied, emotional, and

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Conclusions

149

complete. Described in terms of the recognition of completeness (pu-rn.ata-pratyabhijña-), this self-realization acknowledges the body and emotion as
essential to being conscious. Engaging visualization practices in the mainstream discourse has the potential not only to remap our understanding of
Indian culture, but also to shed light on varied nuances of embodiment and
consciousness, concept formation, imagination, and memory in particular.
Someone blind from birth may well be an art critic, but I do not think it
possible to read Tantric culture separate from the images and Tantric philosophies. The approaches I have engaged in the above pages rely on these
assumptions.

Note
1 For study of body and parts in Tantric images, see Timalsina 2014 (Language of
Images, Peter Lang, in Press).

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Bibliography

Primary sources
Amarakos.a. With the Commentaries Ra-ma-śramı- and Praka-śa. Chaukhambha Sanskrit
Sansthan, Varanasi, 1982.
Bhagavadbhaktirasa-yana of Madhusu-dana Sarasvatı-. [Ed.] Janardana Sastri Pandeya.
Varanasi: Parvatiya Mudranalaya, 1991, 1976.
Bha-vanopanis.ad. With the Commentary of Bha-skarara-ya. [Ed.] S. Misra. Madras:
Ganesh, 1976.
Dhvanya-loka of Anandavardhana with the Locana of Abhinavagupta. [Ed.] Pt. Pat.t.a-bhirama Śastrı. Kashi Sanskrit Series 135. Benaras City (Varanasi): Chowkhamba
Sanskrit Series Oﬃce, 1940.
Dhya-nama-la-. In author’s private collection.
Devyatharvaśı-rs.a. See the Devı-ma-ha-tmya.
DM Devı-ma-ha-tmya. In “Praise of the Goddess: The Devı-ma-ha-tmya and its Meaning.”
[Ed. with English Translation] Devadatta Kali. York Beach: Nicolas-Hays, 2003.
Guhyasama-jatantra. Or Tatha-gataguhyaka. [Ed.] Benoytosh Bhattacharyya. Baroda:
Oriental Institute, 1967.
Ka-vya-darśa of Dan.d.in [Ed.] Pt. Rangacharya Raddi Śa-strı-. Poona: Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute, 1938.
Ka-vyamı-ma-m
. sa of Rajaśekhara [Ed.] C.D. Dalal and Pandit R.A. Shastry. Gaekwad
Oriental Series. Baroda: Oriental Institute, 1934.
Ka-vyapraka-śa of Mammat.a [Ed.] Vamanacharya Jhalkikar. Poona: Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute, 1965.
Ku-rmapura-n.a. The Ku-rmapura-n.a. [Ed.] Tagore, Ganesh Vasudeo. Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass, 1981–82.
.
Lingapura-n.a. With the Sanskrit Commentary Śivatos.in.-ı. Shastri, Jagdish Lal, and
Natu, Ganesa. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1980.
Maha-rthamañjarı-. With Parimala. Maheśvara-nanda. [Ed.] Vrajavallabha Dwivedi.
Varanasi: Sampurnanda Sanskrit University, 1992.
Mantra-bhidha-nakos.a. In Dictionaries of Tantra Śa-stra. [Ed.] Ram Kumar Rai. Varanasi:
Prachya Prakashan, 2005.
-- Maha-ka-lasam
. hita. The Guhyakalı Section of the Mahakalasam
. hita (II). [Ed.] Kishor
Nath Jha. Ilahabad: Ganganath Jha Kendriya Samskrit Vidyapith, 1977.
-Maha-ka-lasam
. hita. The Guhyakalı Section (I). [Ed.] Radheshyam Caturvedi. With the
Jñanavatı Hindı Commentary. Varanasi: Caukhambha Surabharati Prakashan, 2009.
Medinı-kos.a. Na-na-rthaśabdakos.a-paraparyayo Medinı-kos.ah.. [Ed.] Sastri, Jagannatha.
Varanasi: Chaukhamba Samskrta Sirij, 1968.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Bibliography

151

Netratantra. Ed., with notes by Pandit Vrajballabh Dviveda. Delhi: Parimal.
NŚ Na-t.yaśa-stra. The Na-t.yaśa-stra of Bharatamuni. Delhi: Sri Satguru Publications, 1987.
Nitya-s.od.aśika-rn.ava: With the Commentaries R.juvimarśinı- and Artharatna-valı-. [Ed.]
Dviveda, Vraja Vallabha. Varanasi: Sampurnanda Samskrit University, 1985.
Nya-ya Lı-la-vatı-. Of Vallabha-ca-rya With the Commentaries Praka-śa, Kan.t.ha-bharan.a,
and the Vivtti upon Praka-śa. Varanasi: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series, 1991.
.
The Pada-rthadharmasangraha of Praśastapa-da. With the Nya-yakandalı- of Śrı-dhara
Bhat.t.a. Edited with Hindi Translation by Durgadhar Jha. Varanasi: Sampurnananda
Samskrit University, 1977.
Prapañcasa-ra Tantra. With the commentary Vivaran.a by Padmapa-da-ca-rya. Edited
with notes by Arthur Avalon. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1989 (1935).
Pratis.t.ha-laks.an.asa-rasamuccaya. [Ed.] Buddhisa-gara Śarma- Para-julı-. Kathmandu:
Nepala Ra-jakı-ya Pustaka-laya, 1966.
Puraścarya-rn.ava of Pratapa Sim
. ha. [Ed.] Rana, Dhana Shamser. Kathmandu: Nepal
Press, 1972.
.
RG Rasaganga-dhara. With ‘Candrika-’ by Madanamohana Jha. Varanasi: Chowkhamba
Vidyabhawan, 1995.
.
.
Sa-nkhyasangraha. Dvivedi, [Ed.] Vindhyesvari Prasa. Varanasi: Chowkhamba Sanskrit
Series Oﬃce, 1969.
SD Sa-hityadarpan.a. With the commentary ‘Laks.mı-’ by Kr.s.n.amohana Śa-strı-. Varanasi:
Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthan, 2007.
Saundaryalaharı-: With ten commentaries and English translation. [Ed.] Kuppuswami,
A. Delhi: Nag Publishers, 1991.
Śivapura-n.a. The Śiva Maha-pura-n.a. [Eds] Singh, Nag Sharan, and Pushpendra Kumar.
Delhi: Nag Publishers, 1996.
Śiva Su-tras: The Yoga of Supreme Identity. [Trans.] Singh, Jaideva. Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass, 1979.
Spandaka-rika-. Spanda-Ka-rika-s: The Divine Creative Pulsation. [Trans.] Singh, Jaideva.
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1980.
ŚVT Śrı-vidya-rn.avatantra. Vol. I. [Eds] Kak, Ramchandra and Harabhatta Shastri.
Varanasi: Pracya Prakasan, 1986.
Svacchandatantra. [Ed.] Sastri, Madhusudan Kaul. Delhi: Sanskrit Jña-na Sam
. sthana.
Tantra-loka. With Viveka commentary of Jayaratha. [Eds] Dwivedi, R.C. and Navajivan
Rastogi. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1987.
Yogava-sis.t.ha. With the Commentary Ta-tparyapraka-śa. [Ed.] Vasudeva Laxmana.
Sharma Pansikar (vol. 2). Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1984.
Yoginı-hr.daya. In Yoginı-hr.daya with Dı-pika- and Setubandha commentaries. [Ed.]
Kaviraj, Gopinath. Varanasi: Sampurnanda University, 1979.

Secondary sources
Aarts, Jan M.G. and Joseph P. Calbert. 1979. Metaphor and Non-Metaphor: The
Semantics of Adjective–Noun Combinations. Tübingen: Niemeyer.
Akhter, Ashen. 1977. “Imagery and Verbal Behavior,” Journal of Mental Imagery,
1(1): 5–38.
Alper, Harvey P. (Ed.) 1991. Understanding Mantras. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Amaladass, Anand S.J. 1984. Philosophical Implications of Dhvani: Experience of
Symbol Language in Indian Aesthetics. Vienna: Institut fur Indologie der Universitat
Wein.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

152

Bibliography

Argyris, C. and D.A. Schon. 1978. Organizational Learning: A Theory of Action
Perspective. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Auer, Peter and Stefan Pfander. 2011. Constructions: Emerging and Emergent. Berlin:
De Gruyter.
Avalon, Arthur. 1974. The Serpent Power: The Secrets of Tantric and Shaktic Yoga.
New York: Dover Publications.
Babb, Lawrence. 1981. “Glancing: Visual Interaction in Hinduism,” Journal of
Anthropological Research, 37(4): 387–401.
Bagchi, Prabodh Chandra. 1934. “A Note on the Language of the Buddhist Doha-s,”
Calcutta Oriental Journal, 1(7): 249–251.
Bagchi, Prabodh Chandra. 1935. “Doha-kos.a with Notes and Translation,” Journal of
the Department of Letters [University of Calcutta], 28: 1–180.
Bagchi, Prabodh Chandra. (Ed.) 1938. Doha-kos.a: Apabhram
. śa Text of the Sahajayana
School. Calcutta Sanskrit Series No. 25C. Calcutta: Metropolitan.
Bakhtin, M.M. 1981. The Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays. (Ed.) Holquist, Michael.
[Trans.] Emerson, Caryl and Michael Holquist. Austin, TX and London: University
of Texas Press.
Bailly, Constantina Rhodes. 1987. Shaiva Devotional Songs of Kashmir: A Translation
and Study of Utpaladeva’s Shivastotravali. Albany, NY: State University of New
York Press.
Ballantyne, J.R. and Pramada Dasa Mitra. 1994. The Sa-hityadarpan.a or Mirror of
Composition of Viśvana-tha: A Treatise on Poetical Criticism. Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass.
Barcelona, Antonio. (Ed.) 2000a. Metaphor and Metonymy at the Crossroads. [Topics
in English Linguistics 30]. Berlin and New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Barcelona, Antonio. 2000b. “On the Plausibility of Claiming a Metonymic Motivation
for Conceptual Metaphor.” See Barcelona 2000a, 31–58.
Beck, G. (Ed.) 2005. Alternative Krishnas: Regional and Vernacular Variations on a
Hindu Deity. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
Bergaigne, Abel. 1935–6. “Some Observations on the Figures of Speech in the
R
. gveda,” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 17: 61–83, 259–288.
Benjaﬁeld, John G. 2007. Cognition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Berg, Charles. 1951. The Unconscious Signiﬁcance of Hair. London: George Allen and
Unwin.
Bhattacharyya, D.C. 1978. Studies in Buddhist Iconography. Delhi: Manohar.
Bhattacharyya, Benoytosh. 1993. Indian Buddhist Iconography. Delhi: Asian Educational
Services.
.
Bhattacharya, Siva Prasad 1935. “Rasa-bha-sa in Alanka-ra Literature,” Oriental Journal,
2(7): 237–247.
Biernacki, Loriliai. 2007. Renowned Goddess of Desire: Woman, Sex, and Speech in
Tantra. New York: Oxford University Press.
Black, Max. 1962. “Metaphor.” In Models and Metaphors. (Ed.) Black, M. Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press, 25–47.
Blank, Andreas. 1999. “Co-presence and Succession: A Cognitive Typology of Metonymy.”
In Panther and Radden, 169–191.
Bloomﬁeld, Maurice. 1919. “The Mind as Wish-Cart in the Veda,” Journal of the
American Oriental Society, 39: 280–282.
Bolle, C.W. 1959. “Remarks on the Prehistory of Tantric Bı-jas.” Proceedings and
Transactions of the All India Oriental Conference. Bhubaneshwar.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Bibliography

153

Bosch, F.D.K. 1960. The Golden Germ: An Introduction to Indian Symbolism
(Indo-Iranian Monographs 2). The Hague: Mouton.
Brann, Eva T.H. 1991. The World of the Imagination. Lanham, MD: Rowan and
Littleﬁeld.
Brooks, Douglas. 1990. The Secret of Three Cities: An Introduction to Hindu Śa-kta
Tantrism. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Brooks, Douglas. 1992. Auspicious Wisdom: The Texts and Traditions of Śrı-vidyaŚa-kta Tantrism in South India. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
Brooks, Douglas. 2001. “The Ocean of the Heart: Selections from the Kula-rn.ava
Tantra.” In White 2001a: 347–360.
Brown, George W. 1921. The Human Body in the Upanis.ads. Jubbulpore: The Christian
Mission Press. Orig. Dissertation, Johns Hopkins University.
Brown, Norman. 1958. The Saundaryalaharı-, or The Flood of Beauty. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Brown, Richard. 1977. A Poetic for Sociology: Toward a Logic of Discovery for the
Human Sciences. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Burke, Kenneth. 1973. The Philosophy of Literary Form. Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press.
Carson, S.H. and E.J. Langer. 2006. “Mindfulness and Self-acceptance,” Journal of
Rational-Emotive and Cognitive Behavior Therapy, 24: 29–34.
Casey, Edward. 1976. “Comparative Phenomenology of Mental Activity: Memory,
Hallucination, and Fantasy Contrasted with Imagination.” Research in Phenomenology,
6: 1–25.
Casey, Edward. 2000. Imagining: A Phenomenological Study. Bloomington, IN: Indiana
University Press.
Chari, V.K. 1976. “Poetic Emotions and Poetic Semantics,” The Journal of Aesthetics
and Art Criticism, 34(3): 287–299.
Chaudhury, Pravas Jivan. 1965a. “The Theory of Rasa,” The Journal of Aesthetics and
Art Criticism, 24(1): 145–149.
Chaudhury, Pravas Jivan. 1965b. “Catharsis in the Light of Indian Aesthetics,” The
Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 24(1): 151–163.
Cienki, Alan and Deanne Swan. 1999. “Constructions, Blending, and Metaphors:
Integrating Multiple Meanings,” Sixth International Cognitive Linguistics Conference.
Stockholm, July.
Clooney, Francis X. 2005. Divine Mother, Blessed Mother: Hindu Goddesses and the
Virgin Mary. New York: Oxford University Press.
Coburn, Thomas B. 1984. Devı- Ma-ha-tmya: The Crystallization of the Goddess Tradition.
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Coburn, Thomas B. 1991. Encountering the Goddess: A Translation of the Devıma-ha-tmya and a Study of its Interpretation. Albany, NY: State University of New
York Press.
Cooey, Paula M. 1994. Religious Imaginations and the Body: A Feminist Analysis.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Coomaraswamy, A.K. 1913–14. “Hands and Feet in Indian Art,” Burlington Magazine
(London), 24: 204–211.
Coomaraswamy, A.K. and Duggira-la Gopa-lakrishna-yya. 1970 [1917]. The Mirror of
Gesture, Being the Abhinaya Darpan.a of Nandikeśvara. Delhi: Munshiram.
Coulson, Seana. 1995. “Analogic and metaphoric mapping in blended spaces,” Center
for Research in Language Newsletter, 9(1): 2–12.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

154

Bibliography

Coulson, Seana. and Todd Oakley. 2000. “Blending Basics,” Cognitive Linguistics,
11(3–4): 175–196.
Croft, William. 1993. “The Role of Domains in the Interpretation of Metaphors and
Metonymies,” Cognitive Linguistics, 4: 335–370.
Croft, William. 2002. “The Role of Domains in the Interpretation of Metaphors and
Metonymies,” In Metaphor and Metonymy in Comparison and Contrast. (Eds)
Dirvan, René and Ralf Pörings. New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Croft, William. 2006a. “Metonymy: the Role of Domains in the Interpretation of
Metaphors and Metonymies.” In Geeraerts 2004: 335–370.
Croft, William. 2006b. “On Explaining Metonymy: Comment on Peirsman and Geeraerts,
‘Metonymy as Prototypical Category’,” Cognitive Linguistics, 17(3): 317–326.
Crooke, William. 1919. “Secret Messages and Symbols Used in India,” Journal of the
Bihar and Orissa Research Society, 5: 451–462.
Coulson, Seana and Todd Oakley. 2005. “Blending and Coded Meaning: Literal
and Figurative Meaning in Cognitive Semantics,” Journal of Pragmatics, 37: 1510–1536.
Coward, Harold. 1991. “The Meaning and Power of Mantras in Bhartr.hari’s
Va-kyapadı-ya,” In Alper 1991: 165–176.
Cuneo, Daniele. 2006. “Linguisticità ed Esperienza Estetica in Abhinavagupta e
Gadamar,” Rivista di Studi Sudasiatici, i: 139–160.
Davidson, Ronald M. 2002. “Reframing Sahaja: Genre, Representation, Ritual and
Lineage,” Journal of Indian Philosophy, 30: 45–83.
Davidson, Ronald M. 2003. Indian Esoteric Buddhism: A Social History of the Tantric
Movement. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Dehaene, S., J.P. Changeux, L. Nacchache, J. Sackut, and C. Sergent. 2006. “Conscious, Preconscious, and Subliminal Processing: a Testable Taxonomy,” Trends in
Cognitive Science, 10: 204–211.
Dehejia, Vidya. 1986. Yoginı- Cult and Temples. New Delhi: National Museum.
Daniélou, Alain. 1964. Hindu Polytheism. New York: Pantheon Books.
Davis, Richard. 1997. Lives of Indian Images. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Dawa-samdup, Kazi. 1984 (1919). Shrichakrasambhara Tantra: A Buddhist Tantra.
Talent, OR: Canon Publications.
de Sousa, Ronald. 1987. The Rationality of Emotion. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Devy, G.N. 2002. Indian Literary Criticism: Theory and Interpretation. Hyderabad:
Orient Longman.
Dhawan, Savitri. 1997. Mother Goddesses in Early Indian Religion. Jaipur: National
Publishing House.
Díez Velasco, Olga Isabel. 2001. “Metaphor, Metonymy, and Image-schemas: an
Analysis of Conceptual Interaction Patterns,” Journal of English Studies, 3: 47–63.
Dikshitar, V.R. 1942. The Lalita- Cult. Monograph of the Bulletin of the Dept. of
Indian History and Archaeology. Madras: University of Madras.
Dimock, E.C. 1966. The Place of the Hidden Moon: Erotic Mysticism in the Vais.n.ava
Sahajiya- Cult of Bengal. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Dirven, René. 1993. “Metonymy and Metaphor: Diﬀerent Mental Strategies of
Conceptualization,” Leuvense Bijdragen, 8(2): 1–25.
Dirven, René and Ralf Pörings. (Eds) 2003. “Metaphor and Metonymy in Comparison and
Contrast,” Cognitive Linguistic Research, 20. Berlin and New York: Mouton deGruyter.
Donald, Merlin. 2006. “Art and Cognitive Evolution,” In The Artful Mind: Cognitive
Science and the Riddle of Human Creativity. (Ed.) Turner, Mark. New York: Oxford
University Press, 3–20.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Bibliography

155

Dupuche, John R. 2001. “Person to Person: Vivaran.a of Abhinavagupta on
Para-trim
. śika Verses 3–4,” Indo-Iranian Journal, 44(1): 1–16.
Dyczkowski, Mark. 2009. Mantha-nabhairavatantra: Kuma-rika-khan.d.a (12 vols). Delhi:
Indira Gandhi National Center.
Eck, Diana. 1981. Darśan: Seeing the Divine Image in India. Chambersburg, PA:
Anima Books.
Einstein, G.O. and McDaniel, M.A. 2004. Memory Fitness: A Guide for Successful
Aging. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Emanatian, Michele. 1999. “Congruence by Degree. On the Relation between Metaphor and Cultural Models,” In Metaphor in Cognitive Linguistics. (Eds) Gibbs, Jr.,
R.W., and G. Steen. Amsterdam and Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins Publishing
Company, 205–218.
Emanatian, Michele. 1995. “Metaphor and the Expression of Emotion: the Value of
Cross-cultural Perspectives,” Metaphor and Symbolic Activity, 10: 163–182.
English, Elizabeth. 2002. Vajrayoginı-: Her Visualizations, Rituals, and Forms. Boston,
MA: Wisdom Publications.
Esgate, A. and D. Groome. 2005. An Introduction to Applied Cognitive Psychology.
Hove: Psychology Press.
Fauconnier, G. 1985. Mental Spaces: Aspects of Meaning Construction in Natural
Language. Cambridge, MA and London: The MIT Press.
Fauconnier, G. 2001. “Conceptual Blending and Analogy,” In The Analogical Mind:
Perspectives from Cognitive Science. (Eds) Gentner, Dedre, Keith Holyoak, and
Boicho Kokinov. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 255–286.
Fauconnier, G. 2002. The Way We Think: Conceptual Blending and Mind’s Hidden
Complexities. New York: Basic Books.
Fauconnier, G. and Mark Turner. 1998. “Conceptual Integration Networks,” Cognitive Science, 22: 2, 133–187. Expanded CSN version. [original article] [A Danish
translation by Martin Skov, “Konceptuelle integreringsnetværk,” appears in Kognitiv
semiotik, edited by Peer F. Bundgård, Jesper Egholm, and Martin Skov (Copenhagen:
Haase & Søns, 2003)].
Fauconnier, G. and Mark Turner. 2000. “Metaphor, Metonymy, and Binding,” In
Barcelona 2000a: 133–145.
Fauconnier, G. and Mark Turner. 1994. “Conceptual Projection and Middle Spaces,”
UCSD Department of Cognitive Science Technical Report 9401. CSN version.
Fauconnier, G. and Mark Turner. 1998. “Principles of Conceptual Integration,” In
Discourse and Cognition. (Ed.) Jean-Pierre Koenig. Stanford, CA: Center for the
Study of Language and Information (CSLI), 269–283 [distributed by Cambridge
University Press].
Fauconnier, G. and Mark Turner. 1999. “Metonymy and Conceptual Integration,” In
Metonymy in Language and Thought. [A volume in the series Human Cognitive
Processing]. (Eds) Panther, Klaus-Uwe and Günter Radden. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins, 77–90.
Fauconnier, G. 2000. “Conceptual Integration and Analogy,” In The Analogical Mind:
Perspectives from Cognitive Science. (Eds) Gentner, D., K.J. Holyoak, and B.N.
Kokinov. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fauconnier, G. and Mark Turner. 2003. “Polysemy and Conceptual Blending,” In
Polysemy: Flexible Patterns of Meaning in Mind and Language. [A volume in the
series Trends in Linguistics]. (Eds) Nerlich, Brigitte, Vimala Herman, Zazie Todd,
and David Clarke. Berlin and New York: John Benjamins. Mouton de Gruyter, 79–94.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

156

Bibliography

Fauconnier, G. 2005. “Compression and Emergent Structure,” Language and Linguistics,
6(4): 523–538.
Fauconnier, G. and Mark Turner. 2008. “Rethinking Metaphor,” In Gibbs 2008:
53–66.
Faure, Bernard. 1998. The Red Thread: Buddhist Approaches to Sexuality. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Feyaerts, Kurt. 2000. “Reﬁning the Inheritance Hypothesis: Interaction between
Metaphoric and Metonymic Hierarchies,” In Barcelona 2000a: 149–169.
Findley, Ellison Banks. 1991. “Mántra Kavisastá: Speech as Performative in the
R
. gveda,” In Alper 1991: 15–47.
Fingesten, Peter. 1970. The Eclipse of Symbolism. Columbia, SC: University of South
Carolina Press.
Flanagan, Owen. 2000. Dreaming Souls. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Flood, Gavin. 2001. “The Puriﬁcation of the Body,” In White 2001a: 509–522.
Flood, Gavin. 2006. The Tantric Body: The Secret Tradition of Hindu Religion. New
York: I. B. Tauris.
Fludernik, Monika, Donald Freeman, and Margaret Freeman. 1999. “Metaphor and
Beyond: An Introduction,” Poetics Today, 20(3): 383–396.
Forceville, Charles. 2002. “The Identiﬁcation of Target and Source in Pictorial
Metaphors,” Journal of Pragmatics, 34: 1–14.
Forceville, Charles. 2005. “Visual Representations of the Idealized Cognitive Model of
Anger in the Asterix Album La Zizanie,” Journal of Pragmatics, 37: 69–88.
Forceville, Charles. 2006. “Non-verbal and Multimodal Metaphor in the Cognitivist
Framework: Agendas for Research,” In Cognitive Linguistics: Current Applications
and Future Perspectives. (Eds) Kristiansen, G., M. Achard, R. Dirven, and F.J. Ruiz
de Mendoza. Amsterdam and New York: Mouton de Gruyter, 379–402.
Fuertes-Olivera, Pedro A., Marisol Velasco-Sacristán, and Ascensión, Arribas-Baño.
Geeraerts, D. (Ed.) 2004. Cognitive Linguistics: Basic Readings [Cognitive Linguistics
Research 2004]. Amsterdam and New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Germine, Mark. 2007. “The Holographic Principle Theory of Mind.” Available at:
http://goertzel.org/ dynapsyc/2007/holomind.htm. Accessed 7.28.2011.
Gerow, Edwin. 1971. A Glossary of Indian Figures of Speech. The Hague: Mouton.
Gerow, Edwin and Ashok Aklujkar. 1972. “On Śa-nta Rasa in Sanskrit Poetics:
Śa-ntarasa and Abhinavagupta’s Philosophy of Aesthetics by J. L. Masson; M. V.
Patwardhan,” Journal of the American Oriental Society, 92(1): 80–87.
Gerow, Edwin. 1981. “Rasa as a Category of Literary Criticism,” In Sanskrit Drama
in Performance. (Eds) van Meter Baumer, Rachel and James Brandon. Honolulu,
HI: University of Hawaii, 226–257.
Gerow, Edwin. 1994. “Abhinavagupta’s Aesthetics as a Speculative Paradigm,” Journal
of the American Oriental Society, 114(2): 186–208.
Gerow, Edwin. 2002. “Rasa and Katharsis: A Comparative Study, Aided by Several
Films,” Journal of the American Oriental Society, 122(2): 264–277.
Gerow, Edwin and Reed College. 1994. “Abhinavagupta’s Aesthetics as a Speculative
Paradigm,” Journal of the American Oriental Society, 114(2): 186–208.
Gerow, Edwin. 2013. “Notes on the Relevance of Indian Poetics to General Poetic
Theory,” In Abhinava-: Perspectives on Abhinavagupta. (Eds) Rastogi, Navjivan and
Meera Rastogi. Delhi: Munshiram.
Gibbs, Raymond W. 1987. “What does it mean to say that a metaphor has been
understood?” In Cognition and Symbolic Structures: The Psychology of Metaphoric

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Bibliography

157

Transformations. (Ed.) Haskell, R. Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing Corporation,
31–48.
Gibbs, Raymond W. 1994. The Poetics of Mind: Figurative Thought, Language and
Understanding. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gibbs, Raymond W. and Herbert L. Colston. 1995. “The Cognitive Psychological
Reality of Image Schemas and Their Transformations,” Cognitive Linguistics, 6(4):
347–378.
Gibbs, Raymond W. and Gerard J. Steen. (Eds) 1999. Metaphor in Cognitive Linguistics.
Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
Gibbs, Raymond W., Paula Lenz Costa Lima, and Edson Francoso. 2004. “Metaphor
is Grounded in Embodied Experience,” Journal of Pragmatics, 36: 1189–1210.
Gibbs, Raymond W. (Ed.) 2008. The Cambridge Handbook of Metaphor and Thought.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Gitomer, David L. 2003. “Wrestling with Raudra in Sanskrit Poetics: Gender, Pollution,
and Śa-stra,” International Journal of Hindu Studies, 4(3): 219–236.
Gnoli, Raniero. 1956. “The aesthetic experience according to Abhinavagupta,” Instituto
italiano per l’Africa e l’Oriente, Rome.
Goddard, Cliﬀ. 2004. “The Ethnopragmatics and Semantics of ‘Active Metaphors,’”
Journal of Pragmatics, 36: 1211–1230.
Gonda, Jan. 1939. “The Meaning of the Word alam
. kara,” In A Volume of Eastern and
Indian Studies in Honor of F.W. Thomas. (Eds) S.M. Katre, and P.K. Gode.
Bombay: NIA, extra series I, 97–114.
Gonda, Jan. 1963. “The Indian Mantra,” Oriens, 16: 244–297.
Gonda, Jan. 1969. Eye and Gaze in the Veda. Verhandelingen der (koninklijke)
Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschapen 75.1. Amsterdam: North Holland
Publishing Co.
Gonda, Jan. 1972. “Mudra-,” In Ex orbe religionum, Studia G. Widengren, II. Leiden:
Brill.
Goossens, Louis. 1990. “Metaphtonymy: the Interaction of Metaphor and Metonymy
in Expressions for Linguistic Action,” Cognitive Linguistics, 1(3): 323–340.
Goossens, Louis. 1995. “Metaphtonymy: the Interaction of Metaphor and Metonymy
in Expressions for Linguistic Action,” In By Word of Mouth. Metaphor, Metonymy
and Linguistic Action in a Cognitive Perspective. (Eds) Goossens, L., P. Pauwels, B.
Rudzka-Ostyn, A.M. Simon-Venderbergen, J. Vanparys. Amsterdam and Philadelphia,
PA: John Benjamins, 159–174.
Gopinatha Rao, T.A. 1968 [1914–16]. Elements of Hindu Iconography. 2 vols. in 4
parts. New York: Paragon.
Goudriaan, T., and Sanjukta Gupta. 1981. In Hindu Tantric and Śa-kta Literature A
History of Indian Literature. (Ed.) Gonda, Jan. Vol. II, fasc. 2. Wiesbaden: Otto
Harrossowitz.
Grady, Joseph. 2000. “Cognitive Mechanisms of Conceptual Integration,” Cognitive
Linguistics, 11(3–4): 335–346.
Grady, Joseph. 2005. “Primary Metaphors as Inputs to Conceptual Integration,”
Journal of Pragmatics, 37: 1595–1614.
Grady, Joseph, Todd Oakley, and Seana Coulson. 1999. “Conceptual Blending and
Metaphor,” In Gibbs and Steen 1999: 79–100.
Grönbold, Günter. 1996. The Yoga of Six Limbs: An Introduction to the History
.
of S.ad.angayoga. (Trans.) Robert L. Hutwohl. Santa Fe, NM: Spirit of the Sun
Publications.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

158

Bibliography

Groninger, L.D. 1971. “Mnemonic Imagery and Forgetting,” Psychonomic Science,
23: 161–163.
Guenther, Herbert V. (Trans. with notes). 1969. The Royal Song of Saraha: A Study in
the History of Buddhist Thought. Seattle, WA: University of Washington Press.
Guenther, Herbert V. 1993. Ecstatic Spontaneity: Saraha’s Three Cycles of Doha-.
Nanzan Studies in Asian Religions 4. Berkeley, CA: Asian Humanities Press.
Gupta, Bharat. 1994. Dramatic Concepts Greek and Indian: A Study of the Poetics and
the Na-t.yaśa-stra. New Delhi: D.K. Printworld.
Gupta, Bina. 1995. Perceiving in Advaita Veda-nta: Epistemological Analysis and
Interpretation. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Gupta, Sanjukta. 2002. See Harper and Brown 2002.
Gyatso, Janet. 1992. In the Mirror of Memory: Reﬂections on Mindfulness and
Remembrance in Indian and Tibetan Buddhism. New York: State University of New
York Press.
Haarh, Erik. 1958. “Contributions to the Study of Man.d.ala and Mudra-,” Acta
Orientalia, 23: 57–91.
Hanks, William F. 1996. Language and Communicative Practices. Boulder, CO: Westview.
Harper, Katherine Anne, and Robert L. Brown. (Eds) 2002. The Roots of Tantra. New
York: State University of New York Press.
Harris, Paul. 2000. The Work of Imagination. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Harsch, Paul. 1957. “The Wheel: An Indian Symbol of World-Interpretation,” In
Liebenthal Festschrift. (Ed.) Ksitis Roy. Santiniketan: Visvabharati, 62–79.
Hart, Christopher. 2007. “Critical Discourse Analysis and Conceptualisation: Mental
Spaces, Blended Spaces, and Discourse Spaces in the British National Party,” In
Cognitive Linguistics in Critical Discourse Analysis: Application and Theory. (Eds)
Hart, Christopher, and Dominik Lukes. Newcastle Upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars
Publishing.
Hawley, John Stratton, and Donna Marie Wulﬀ. (Eds) 1982. The Divine Consort:
Ra-dha- and the Goddess of India. Berkeley CA: Berkeley Religious Studies Series,
Graduate Theological Union.
Hayes, G.A. 1985. Shapes for the Soul: A Study of Body Symbolism in the Vais.n.ava-sahajiyaTradition of Medieval Bengal. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Chicago.
Hayes, G.A. 2003. “Metaphoric Worlds and Yoga in the Vais.n.ava Sahajiya- Tantric
Traditions of Medieval Bengal,” In Whicher and Carpenter 2003: 162–184.
Hayes, G.A. 2005. “Contemporary Metaphor Theory and Alternative Views of Krishna
and Ra-dha- in Vaishnava Sahajiya- Tantric Traditions,” In Beck 2005: 19–32.
Hayes, G.A. 2006. “The Guru’s Tongue: Metaphor, Imagery, and Vernacular Language
in Vais.n.ava Sahajiya- Traditions,” Paciﬁc World: Journal of the Institute of Buddhist
Studies, 3(8): 41–71.
Hayes, G.A. 2012. “Conceptual Blending Theory, ‘Reverse Amnesia,’ and the Study of
Tantra,” in The Journal of Hindu Studies, 1(17), doi:10.1093/jhs/his022.
Hayes, G.A. 2013. “Possible Selves, Body Schemas, and Sa-dhana: Using Neuroscience in
the Study of Medieval Vais.n.ava Hindu Tantric Texts,” Presentation at the International
Workshop on Buddhism and Science, April 12–14. University of Toronto, Scarborough.
Heilijger-Seelens, Dorothea Maria. 1994. The System of Five Cakras in Kubjikamatantra
14-1. Groningen: Egbert Forsten.
Hernstein, R.J., Donald H. Loveland, and Cynthia Cable. 1976. “Natural Concepts in
Piegons,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavioral Processes, 2(4):
285–302.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Bibliography

159

Higgins, Kathleen Marie. 2007. “An Alchemy of Emotion: Rasa and Aesthetic
Breakthroughs,” The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 65(1): 43–54.
Hiltebeitel, Alf. 1989. Criminal Gods and Demon Devotees: Essays on the Guardians of
Popular Hinduism. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
Hiltebeitel, Alf and Barbara S. Miller. 1998. Hair: Its Power and Meaning in Asian
Cultures. New York: State University of New York Press.
Hogan, Patrick Colm. 1996. “Toward a Cognitive Science of Poetics: Anandavardhana,
Abhinavagupta, and the Theory of Literature,” College Literature, 23(1): 164–178.
Holland, Dorothy, and Naomi Quinn. (Eds) 1987. Cultural Models of Language and
Thought. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Honeywell, J.A. 1969. “The Poetic Theory of Viśvana-tha,” The Journal of Aesthetics
and Art Criticism, 28(2): 165–176.
Hussain, Mazhar and Robert Wilkinson (Ed.) 2006. The Pursuit of Comparative
Aesthetics: An Interface between the East and West. Burlington, VT: Ashgate.
Ikegami, Y. 1971. “A Stratiﬁcation Analysis of the Hand Gestures in Indian Classical
Dancing,” Semiotica, 4(4): 365–391.
Ingalls, Daniel H.H. 1963. An Anthology of Well-Turned Verse: Vidya-kara’s
Subha--s.itaratnakośa. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Ingalls, Daniel H.H., Jeﬀrey Moussaieﬀ Masson, and M.V. Patwardhan. 1990. The
Dhvanya-loka of Amamdavardhana with the Locana of Abhinavagupta. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Igarashi, Yuka, Norimichi Kitagawa, Charles Spence, and Shigeru Ichihara. 2007.
“Assessing the Inﬂuence of Schematic Drawings of Body Parts on Tactile Discrimination Performance Using the Crossmodal Congruency Task,” Acta Psychologica, 124:
190–208.
Isola, Philip, Jianxiong Xiao, Antonio Torralba, and Aude Oliva. 2011. “What Makes
an Image Memorable,” Journal of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 145–152.
Isola, Philip, D. Parikh, A. Torralba, A. Oliva 2011. Understanding the Intrinsic
Memorability of Images. Granada: NIPS.
Iyer, K.A. 1992. Bhartr.hari: A Study of the Va-kyapadı-ya in the Light of the Ancient
Commentaries. Pune: Deccan College.
Izutsu, T. 1956. Language and Magic. Tokyo: Keio Institute of Philological Studies.
Jakobson, Roman. 1971 [1956]. The metaphoric and metonymic poles. In Fundamentals
of Language, vol. 2. (Eds) Jakobson, R. and M. Halle. The Hague: Mouton, 90–96.
Jackson, Roger R. 1992. “Ambiguous Sexuality: Imagery and Interpretation in Tantric
Buddhism,” Religion, 22: 85–100.
Jackson, Roger R. 2004. Tantric Treasures: Three Collections of Mystical Verse from
Buddhist India. New York: Oxford University Press.
Jarvie, I.C. 1976. “On the Limits of Symbolic Interpretation in Anthropology,” Current
Anthropology, 17: 687–701.
Johnson A.M. 1990. “Speed of Mental Rotation as a Function of Problem Solving
Strategies,” Perceptual and Motor Skills, 71: 803–806.
Johnson, C.J., Paivio, A., and Clark, J.M. 1996. “Cognitive Components of Picture
Naming,” Psychological Bulletin, 112: 113–139.
Johnson, Mark. 1987. The Body in the Mind: The Bodily Basis of Meaning, Imagination,
and Reason. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Johnson, Mark. 1981. Philosophical Perspectives on Metaphor. Minneapolis, MN:
University of Minnesota.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

160

Bibliography

Johnson, Williard. 1976. “On the R
. g Vedic Riddle of the Two Birds in the Fig Tree
(R
. V 1:164, 20–22) and the Discovery of the Vedic Speculative Symposium,” Journal
of American Oriental Society, 96(2): 248–258.
Johnson, Williard. 1980. Poetry and Speculation of the R.g Veda. Berkeley, CA:
UCaPress.
Jones, Cliﬀord R. 1983. “Notes on Comparison of Vedic Mudra-s with Mudra-s as
Used in Ku-t.iya-t.t.am and Kathakali,” In Staal 1983: 2, 380–381.
Jung, Carl G. 1955. “On Mandala Symbolism,” In Archetypes and the Unconscious.
R.F.C. Hull (Trans.) London.
Ka-lı-, Devadatta. 2003. See Devı-ma-ha-tmya.
Kinsley, David R. 1988. Hindu Goddesses: Visions of the Divine Feminine in the Hindu
Religious Traditions. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Kinsley, David R. 1998. The Ten Mahavidyas: Tantric Visions of the Divine Feminine.
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Kirfel, Willibald. 1959a. Symbolik des Buddhismus. (Symbolik der Religion 5). Stuttgart:
Anton Hiersemann.
Kirfel, Willibald. 1959b. Symbolik des Hindusmus und Jinismus. (Symbolik der Religion
4). Stuttgart: Anton Hiersemann.
Kosambi, D.D., and V.V. Gokhale. 1957. The Subha-s.itaratnakos.a. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Kosslyn, Stephen. 1996. Image and Brain. Boston, MA: MIT Press.
Kövecses, Zoltán. 1986. Metaphors of Anger, Pride and Love. Philadelphia, PA: John
Benjamins.
Kövecses, Zoltán. 1990. Emotion Concepts. New York: Springer.
Kövecses, Zoltán. 1999. “Metaphor. Does it Constitute or Reﬂect Cultural Models?”
In Gibbs and Steen 1999: 167–188.
Kövecses, Zoltán. 2000. Metaphor and Emotion: Language, Culture and Body in
Human Feeling. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kövecses, Zoltán. 2002. Metaphor: A Practical Introduction. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Kövecses, Zoltán. 2005. Metaphor and Culture: Universality and Variation. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Kövecses, Zoltán. 2006. Language, Mind and Culture: A Practical Introduction.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kövecses, Zoltán. 2008. “Conceptual Metaphor Theory: Some Criticisms and Alternative
Proposals,” Annual Review of Cognitive Linguistics, 6: 168–184.
Kramrisch, Stella. 1988. The Presence of Śiva. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Krauss, Kristin. 2005. “Tacit Design Issues Regarding the Use of Visual Aesthetics for
Web Page Design,” Alternation, 12(2): 92–131.
Kreijger, Hugo E. 1999. Kathmandu Valley Painting The Jucker Collection. London:
Serindia Publications.
Kripal, Jeﬀrey J. 1994. “Ka-lı-’s tongue and Ramakrishna: ‘Biting the Tongue’ of the
Tantric tradition,” History of Religions, 34(2): 152–189.
Krishnamoorthy, K. 1974. “The Concept of Rasa-bha-sa in Sanskrit Literary Theory,”
Essays in Sanskrit Literary Criticism. Dharwar: Karnatak University Press, 114–136.
Kunjunni Raja, K. 1969 [1963]. Indian Theories of Meaning. Madras: Adyar Library
and Research Center.
Kuppuswami, Appiah 1991. Saundaryalaharı-: With Ten Diﬀerent Commentaries.
Delhi: Nag Publishers.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Bibliography

161

Lakoﬀ, George. 1987. Women, Fire, and Dangerous Things: What Categories Reveal
about the Mind. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Lakoﬀ, George. 1990. “The Invariance Hypothesis in Abstract Reason Based on
Image-Schemas,” Cognitive Linguistics, 1(1): 39–75.
Lakoﬀ, George. 1993. “The Contemporary Theory of Metaphor,” In Ortony 1979a:
202–251.
Lakoﬀ, George and Mark Johnson. 1980. Metaphors We Live By. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
Lakoﬀ, George and Mark Johnson. 1999. Philosophy in the Flesh. The Embodied Mind
and Its Challenge to Western Thought. New York: Basic Books.
Lakoﬀ, George and Mark Turner. 1989. More than Cool Reason: A Field Guide to
Poetic Metaphor. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Lambek, Michael. (Ed.) 2002. A Reader in the Anthropology of Religion. Boston, MA:
Blackwell Publishers.
Larson, Gerald James. 1969. Classical Sa-m
. khya: An Interpretation of its History and
Meaning. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Larson, Gerald James. 1976. “The Aesthetic (Rasa-sva-da) and the Religious (Brahma-sva-da)
in Abhinavagupta’s Kashmir Śaivism,” Philosophy East and West, 26(4): 371–387.
Lawrence, David Peter. 2005. “Remarks on Abhinavagupta’s Use of the Analogy of
Reﬂection,” Journal of Indian Philosophy, 33: 583–599.
Leach, E. (1958). “Magical Hair.” In S. Hugh-Jones and J. Laidlaw (Eds) The Essential
Edmund Leach (Yale) Vol II, 177–201. Also in Journ. Royal. Anth. Inst. 88(2):
147–164.
Levin, David Michael. 1988. The Opening of Vision: Nihilism and the Postmodern
Situation. London: Routledge.
Liddell, Scott K. 1998. “Grounded Blends, Gestures, and Conceptual Shifts,” Cognitive
Linguistics, 9: 283–314.
Liddell, Scott K. 2000. “Blended Spaces and Deixis in Sign Language Discourse,” In
Language and gesture. (Ed.) McNeill, David. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University
Press, 331–357.
Lidke, Jeﬀrey. 2011. “The Resounding Field of Visualised Self-Awareness: The Generation of Synesthetic Consciousness in the Sri Yantra Rituals of Nityasodasikarnava
Tantra,” The Oxford Journal of Hindu Studies, 4: 248–257.
Maglio, Paul P. and Teenie Matlock. 1999. “The Conceptual Structure of Information
Space,” In Personal and Social Navigation of Information Space. (Eds) Munro, A.,
D. Benyon, and K. Hook. London: Springer Verlag.
Malamoud, Charles. 1982. “On the Rhetoric and Semantics of Purus.a-rtha,” In Way
of Life: King, Householder, Renouncer, Essays in Honour of Louis Dumont. (Ed.)
Madan, T.N. Delhi: Vikas, 33–54.
Masson, J.M. 1980. The Oceanic Feeling: The Origins of Religious Sentiment in
Ancient India. Dordrecht: Holland.
Masson, J.L. and M.V. Patwardhan. 1969. Śa-ntarasa and Abhinavagupta’s Philosophy
of Aesthetics. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute.
McCrea, Lawrence. 1997. The Teleology of Poetry in Medieval Kashmir. Doctoral
dissertation, University of Chicago.
McGinn, Colin. 2004. Mindsight: Image, Dream, Meaning. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Meister, Michael. 1979. “Man.d.ala and Practice in Na-gara Architecture in North
India,” Journal of American Oriental Society, 99(2): 204–219.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

162

Bibliography

Merleau-Ponty, Maurice. 1979. Phenomenology of Perception (Trans.). Colin Smith.
Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press.
Mica, Ishino. 2007. Metaphor and Metonymy in Gesture and Discourse. Dissertation.
The University of Chicago.
Miller G. 1979. “Images and Models, Similes and Metaphors,” In Ortony 1979a:
202–250.
Modi, P.M. 1932 [1895]. Aks.ara, A Forgotten Chapter in the History of Indian Philosophy.
Baroda: The Baroda State Press.
Mookerjee, Ajit. 1988. Kali: The Feminine Force. Burlington, VT: Destiny Books.
Mukerjee, Radhakamal. 1965. “‘Rasas’ as Springs of Art in Indian Aesthetics,” The
Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 24(1): 91–96.
Müller-Ortega, Paul. 1987. The Triadic Heart of Śiva. Albany, NY: State University of
New York Press.
Nagatomo, Shigenori. 1992. Attunement Through the Body. New York: State University
of New York Press.
Nandi, Tapasvi S. 1973. The Origin and Development of the Theory of Rasa and
Dhvani in Sanskrit Poetics. Theses Publication Series 11. Ahmedabad: Gujarat
University.
Narayanan, Vasudha. 1982. “The Goddess Śrı-: The Blossoming Lotus and Breast
Jewel of Vin.s.u,” In Hawley and Wulﬀ 1982: 224–237.
Nelson, Lance. 2004. “The Ontology of Bhakti: Devotion as Paramapurus.a-rtha in
Gaud.-ıya Vais.n.avism and Madhusu-dana Sarasvatı-,” Journal of Indian Philosophy,
32: 345–392.
Oberhammer, Gerhard. 1991. “The Use of Mantra in Yogic Meditation: The Testimony
of the Pa-śupata,” In Alper 1991: 204–223.
Obeyesekere, Gananath. 1981. Medusa’s Hair: An Essay on Personal Symbols and
Religious Experience. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
O’Flaherty, Wendy Doniger. 1973. Asceticism and Eroticism in the Mythology of Śiva.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
O’Flaherty, Wendy Doniger. 1981. Śiva: The Erotic Ascetic. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Olivelle, Patrick. 1997. “Orgasmic Rapture and Divine Ecstasy: The Semantic History
of Ananda,” Journal of Indian Philosophy, 25: 153–180.
Olivelle, Patrick. 1998. The Early Upanisads: Annotated Text and Translation. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Ortony, A. (Ed.) 1979a. Metaphor and Thought. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ortony, A. 1979b. “The Role of Similarity in Similes and Metaphors,” In Ortony
1979a: 186–201.
O’Shaughnessy, Brian. 1981. The Will: A Dual Aspect Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Padoux, André. 1990. Va-c: The Concept of the Word in Selected Hindu Tantras.
Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
Padoux, André. 1991. “Mantras: What Are They?” In Alper 1991: 295–318.
Paivio, Alan. 1971. Imagery and Verbal Processes. New York: Holt, Rinehart, and
Winston.
Paivio, Alan. 1986. Mental Representations. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Paivio, Alan. 1991. “Dual Coding Theory: Retrospect and Current Status,” Canadian
Journal of Psychology, 45: 255–287.
Pal, Pratapaditya. 1975. Bronzes of Kashmir. Graz: Akademische Druck-u. Verlagsanstalt.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Bibliography

163

Pal, Pratapaditya. 1997. A Collecting Odyssey: Indian, Himalayan, and Southeast
Asian Art. London: Thames and Hudson. Chicago, IL: The Art Institute of Chicago.
Pandey, K.C. 1959. Indian Aesthetics. Varanasi: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series.
Pandey, K.C. 1963. Abhinavagupta: An Historical and Philosophical Study. Varanasi:
Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series.
Panther, Klaus-Uwe. 2006. “Metonymy as a Usage Event,” In Cognitive Linguistics: Current Applications and Future Perspectives. (Eds) Kristiansen, G., M. Achard, R. Dirven,
and Ruiz de Mendoza. Amsterdam and New York: Mouton de Gruyter, 147–186.
Panther, Klaus-Uwe and Günter Radden. (Eds) 1999. Metonymy in Language and
Thought. Amsterdam and Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
Panther, Klaus-Uwe and Linda L. Thornburg. 1999. “The Potentiality for Actuality
Metonymy in English and Hungarian,” In Panther and Thornburg 2003a: 337–357.
Panther, Klaus-Uwe and Linda L. Thornburg. (Eds) 2003a. Metonymic and Pragmatic
Inferencing. Amsterdam and Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
Panther, Klaus-Uwe and Linda L. Thornburg. 2003b. “Introduction. On the Nature of
Conceptual Metonymy,” See Panther and Thornburg 2003a: 1–20.
Papafragau, Anna. 1996. “On Metonymy,” Lingua, 99: 169–195.
Patankar, R.B. 1980. “Does the “Rasa” Theory Have Any Modern Relevance?” Philosophy
East and West, 30(3): 293–303.
Peirsman, Yves and Dirk Geeraerts. 2006. “Metonymy as a Prototypical Category,”
Cognitive Linguistics, 17(3): 269–316.
Perkins, F.T. 1932. “Symmetry in Visual Recall,” The American Journal of Psychology,
44: 473–490.
Prinz, J. 2005. “A Neurofunctional Theory of Consciousness,” In Cognition and the
Brain: The Philosophy and Neuroscience Movement. (Eds) A. Brook, and K. Akins.
New York: Cambridge University Press, 381–396.
.
Pollock, Sheldon. 1998. “Bhoja’s Śr.nga-rapraka-śa and the Problem of Rasa: Historical
Introduction and Translation,” Asiatische Studien/ Etudes asiatiques, 70(1): 117–192.
Pollock, Sheldon. 2003. “Sanskrit Literature from the Inside Out,” In Literary Cultures in History: Reconstructions from South Asia. (Ed.) Sheldon Pollock. Berkeley,
CA: University of California Press.
Pott, Pieter Hendrik. 1966. Yoga and Yantra, Their Interrelations and Their Signiﬁcance
for Indian Archaeology. Rodney Needham, tr. (Koninklijk Instituut voor Taal-, Land- en
Volkenkunde, translation series 8) The Hague: Martinus Nijhoﬀ.
Proudfoot, Wayne. 1987. Religious Experience. Berkeley, CA: University of California
Press.
Pylyshyn, Zenon. 1981. “The Imagery Debate: Analogue Media versus Tacit Knowledge,”
Psychologial Review, 87: 16–45.
Quinn, Naomi. 1991. “The Cultural Basis of Metaphor,” In Fernandez, James (Ed.)
Beyond Metaphor: The Theory of Tropes in Anthropology. Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press, 56–93.
Rabe, Michael D. 2001. “Secret Yantras and Erotic Display for Hindu Temples,” In
White 2001a: 434–446.
Radden, G. 2000. “How Metonymic are Metaphors?” In Barcelona 2000a: 93–108.
Radden, Günter, Kövecses, Zoltan, 1999. “Towards a Theory of Metonymy,” In
Panther and Radden 1999: 17–59.
Raghavan, V. 1940. The Number of Rasas. Madras: Adyar Library and Research Center.
.
Raghavan, V. 1962. Studies on Some Concepts of the Alanka-ra Śa-stra. Adyar: Adyar
Library Research Center.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

164

Bibliography

Rana, Dhanashamser. 1977. Mantravidya-rahasya. Kathmandu: Royal Nepal Academy.
Rhodes, Constantina. 2011. Invoking Lakshmi: The Goddess of Wealth in Song and
Ceremony. New York: State University of New York Press.
Richardson, John T.E. 1980. Mental Imagery and Human Memory. New York: St.
Martin’s Press.
Ricour, Paul. 1977. The Rule of Metaphor, Multi-disciplinary Studies of the Creation of
Meaning in Language. Robert Czerny with Kathleen McLaughlin and John Costello
(Trans.). Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Roberts, Mary Nooter, and Robert, Allen F. 1996. “Memory: Luba Art and the
Making of History,” African Arts, 29(1): 22–35, 101–103.
Ruiz de Mendoza Ibañez, Francisco José. 1997. “Metaphor, Metonymy and
Conceptual Interaction,” ATLANTIS, 19(1): 201–295.
Ruiz de Mendoza Ibañez, Francisco José. 1998a. “Understanding through Metonymy:
the Role of Metonymy in Communication and Cognition,” In Peñas, B. (Ed.) The
Pragmatics of Understanding and Misunderstanding. Zaragoza: Universidad de
Zaragoza, Servicio de Publicaciones, 197–208.
Ruiz de Mendoza Ibáñez, Francisco José. 1998b. “On the Nature of Blending as a
Cognitive Phenomenon,” Journal of Pragmatics, 30: 259–274.
Ruiz de Mendoza Ibañez, Francisco José. 2000. “The Role of Mappings and Domains
in Understanding Metonymy,” In Barcelona 2000a: 109–132.
Ruiz de Mendoza Ibáñez, Francisco José, and Pérez Hernández, L. 2001. “Metonymy and
the Grammar: Motivation, Constraints and Interaction,” Language & Communication,
21(4): 321–357.
Ruiz de Mendoza Ibañez, Francisco José. 2004. “Metonymic Motivation in
Anaphoric Reference,” In Studies in Linguistic Motivation (Cognitive Linguistics
Research). (Eds) Radden, G. and Panther, K. Berlin and New York: Mouton de
Gruyter.
Ruiz de Mendoza Ibañez, Francisco José. 2005. “Construing Meanings through Conceptual Mappings,” In Lengua y Sociedad: Investigaciones recientes en lingüística
aplicada. (Ed.) Fuertes-Olivera, P.A. Servicio de Publicaciones.
Ruiz de Mendoza Ibañez, Francisco José. and J.L. Otal. 2002. Metonymy, Grammar
and Communication. Granada: Comares.
Ruwet N. 1975. “Synecdoches et metonymies,” Poetique, 23: 371–388.
Sacks, Sheldon E. 1979. On Metaphor. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Sanderson, Alexis. 1986. “Man.d.ala and Agamic Identity in the Trika of Kashmir,” In
Mantras et diagrammes rituels dans l’Hindouisme. (Ed.) André Padoux. Paris.
Sanderson, Alexis. 1988. “Śaivism and the Tantric Traditions,” In The World’s Religions.
(Eds) Stewart Sutherland et al. London: Routledge, 660–704.
Sanderson, Alexis. 1990. “The Visualization of the Deities of the Trika,” L’Image
Divine Culte et Meditation dans L’Hindousme. Paris: Editions du CNRS.
Sandelands, L.E., and Stablein, R.E. 1987. “The Concept of Organization Mind,” In
Research in the Sociology of Organizations. (Eds) S. Bachrach and N. DiTomaso
vol. 5. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 135–162.
Sapir, J. David, and J.C. Crocker. 1977. The Social Use of Metaphor: Essays in the
Anthropology of Rhetoric. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press.
.
Śa-strı-, Udaya Vı-ra. 1979. Sa-nkhya Darśana ka- Itiha-sa. Gajiabad: Vaidik Śodha
Sam
. sthana.
Sartre, Jean-Paul. 1966. The Psychology of Imagination. Washington, DC: Washington
Square Press.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Bibliography

165

Saunders, E. Dale. 1957. “Symbolic Gestures in Buddhism,” Artibus Asiae, 21: 47–63.
Saunders, E. Dale. 1960. Mudra-, A Study of Symbolic Gestures in Japanese Buddhist
Sculpture. (Bollingen Series 58). New York: Pantheon Press.
Schacter, Daniel L. and Donna Rose Addis. 2007. “The Cognitive Neuroscience of
Constructive Memory: Remembering the Past and Imagining the Future,” Philosophical
Transactions: Biological Sciences, 362: 1481, 773–786.
Schechner, Richard. 2001. “Rasaesthetics,” The Drama Review, 43: 3, 27–50.
Scruton, Roger. 1974. Art and Imagination. New York: Methuen.
Seto, Ken-ichi, 1999. “Distinguishing Metonymy from Synecdoche.” In Panther and
Radden 2000a: 91–120.
Sharma, B.R. 1956. “Cakra in Brahmanical and Buddhist Scriptures,” Journal of the
Bihar Research Society, Buddha Jayanti Special Issue, 1: 218–244.
Shastri, P.S. 1948. “The Imagery of R
. gveda,” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute, 29: 152–196.
Shaw, Miranda. 1995. Passionate Enlightenment: Women in Tantric Buddhism.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Shaw, Miranda. 2005. Buddhist Goddesses of India. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Shepard, R. and Cooper, L. 1986. Mental Images and their Transformations.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Shore, Bradd. 1996. Culture in Mind: Cognition, Culture, and the Problem of Meaning.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Shulman, David. 2012. More Than Real: A History of the Imagination in South India.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Siegel, R.K., and W.K. Honig. 1970. “Pigeon Concept Formation: Successive and
Simultaneous Acquisition,” Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 13(3):
385–390.
Silburn, Lilian. 1988. Kun.d.alini: The Energy of the Depths: A Comprehensive Study
Based on the Scriptures of Nondualistic Kaśmir Śaivism. Albany, NY: State University
of New York Press.
Sinding, Michael. 2002. “Assembling Spaces: the Conceptual Structure of Allegory,”
Style, 36(3) (Special Issue on Cognitive Approaches to Figurative Language): 503–523.
Slingerland, Edward. 2005. “Conceptual Blending, Somatic Marking, and Normativity:
A Case Example from Ancient China,” Cognitive Linguistics, 16(2): 557–584.
Skora, Kerry Martin. 2007a. “Abhinavagupta’s Erotic Mysticism: The Reconciliation
of Spirit and Flesh,” International Journal of Hindu Studies, 11(1): 63–88.
Skora, Kerry Martin. 2007b. “The Pulsating Heart and its Divine Sense Energies:
Body and Touch in Abhinavagupta’s Trika Śaivism,” Numen, 54: 420–458.
Skora, Kerry Martin. 2009. “The Hermeneutics of Touch: Uncovering Abhinavagupta’s
Tactile Terrain,” Method and Theory in the Study of Religion, 21: 87–106.
Smith, Frederick M. 2006. The Self Possessed: Deity and Spirit Possession in South
Asian Literature and Civilization. New York: Columbia University Press.
Song, Nam Sun. 1997. “Metaphor and Metonymy,” In Relevance Theory: Applications
and Implications. (Eds) Carston, R., and S. Uchida. Amsterdam and Philadelphia,
PA: John Benjamins.
Sondergaard, Morten. 1999. “Blended Spaces in Contemporary Art,” Beyond Babel:
18th Annual Conference of the Western Humanities Alliance. San Diego.
Sperber, Dan. 1975. Rethinking Symbolism. Alice L. Merton (Trans.). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

166

Bibliography

Srinivasan, Doris. 1978. “The Religious Signiﬁcance of Divine Multiple Body Parts in
the Atharva Veda,” Numen 25, fasc. 3.
Srinivasan, Doris. 1997. Many Heads, Arms and Eyes: Origin, Meaning and Form of
Multiplicity in Indian Art. Leiden: Brill.
Staal, Frits. 1983. Agni, The Vedic Ritual of the Fire Altar (in collaboration with C.V.
Somayajipad and M. Itti Ravi Nambudiri), 2 vols. Berkeley, CA: Asian Humanities
Press.
Staal, Frits. 1991. “Vedic Mantras,” See Alper 1991: 48–95.
Stange, Paul. 1984. “The Logic of Rasa in Java,” Indonesia, 38: 113–134.
Sternberg, R.J. 2003. Cognitive Theory (3rd edn). Belmont, CA: Thomson Wadsworth.
Sternberg, R.J. 2006. Cognitive Psychology (4th edn). Belmont, CA: Thomson.
Strauss, E. 1960. “Die aufrechte Haltung: eine Anthropologische Studie,” In Psychologie
der menschlichen Welt. Gesammelte Schriften. Berlin: Springer, 224–235.
Strawson, P.F. 1970. “Imagination and Perception,” In Experience and Theory. (Eds)
Foster, Lawrence, and J.W. Swanson. London: Duckworth.
.
Subrahmanian, V.K. 1977. Saundaryalaharı-: The Ocean of Divine Beauty of Śankara-ca-rya.
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Sweetser, Eve. 2000. “Blended Spaces and Performativity,” Cognitive Linguistics,
11(3–4): 305–334.
Tall, David, and Shlomo Vinner. 1981. “Concept Image and Concept Deﬁnition in
Mathematics with Particular Reference to Limits and Continuity,” Educational
Studies in Mathematics, 12: 151–169.
Tengelyi, László. 2007. “Redescription and Reﬁguration of Reality in Ricour,”
Research in Phenomenology, 37: 160–174.
Thampi, G.B. Mohan. 1965. “ “Rasa” as Aesthetic Experience,” The Journal of Aesthetics
and Art Criticism, 24(1): 75–80.
Thomas, N.J.T. 2011. “Mental Imagery,” In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
(Ed.) Edward N. Zalta. Available at: http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/mental-imagery/
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2005. “Meditating Mantras: Meaning and Visualization in
Tantric Literature,” Theory and Practice of Yoga: Essays in Honour of Gerard
James Larson. (Ed.) Jacobsen, Knut. Leiden: Brill, 213–236.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2006. Seeing and Appearance: History of the Advaita Doctrine
of Dr.s.t.isr.s.t.i. Aachen: Shaker Verlag.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2006. “Terrifying Beauty: Interplay of the Sanskritic
and Vernacular Rituals of Siddhilaks.mı-,” International Journal of Hindu Studies, 10:
59–73.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2007. “Metaphors, Rasa, and Dhvani: Suggested Meaning in
Tantric Esotericism,” Method and Theory in the Study of Religion, 19(1–2): 134–162.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2008. “Cosmic Awareness and Yogic Absorption in the Na-th
Literature,” Studien zur Indologie und Iranistik, StII, 25: 137–168.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2009. “Ritual, Reality, and Meaning: The Vedic Ritual of
Cremating a Surrogate Body,” Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft
(ZDMG), 159(1): 45–69.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2010a. “Mantra,” Encyclopedia of Hinduism (Vol. 2). (Ed.)
Jacobsen, Knut Axel. Leiden: Brill.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2010b. “Śakti,” Encyclopedia of Hinduism (Vol. 2). (Ed.)
Knut Axel Jacobsen. Leiden: Brill.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2013. “Contemplating the Image of Bhairava: A Study of
Kshemara-ja’s Bhairava-nukaranastava,” Journal of Indian Research, I(1): 42–52.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Bibliography

167

Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2013. “Image and Visualization in Classical Hinduism,”
SERAS: Southeast Regional Association for Asian Studies, 35: 50–69.
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar. 2014. “Text as the Metaphoric Body: Incorporation of Tripurain Saundaryalaharı-.” Zeitschrift für Indologie und Südasienstudien. Forthcoming.
Timm, Jeﬀrey R. 1991. “The Celebration of Emotion: Vallabha’s Ontology of Aﬀective
Experience,” Philosophy East and West, 41(1): 59–75.
Todd, J. Jay, and René Marlos. 2004. “Capacity Limit of Visual Short-term Memory
in Human Posterior Parietal Cortex,” Nature, 428: 751–754.
Toren, C. 1984. “Thinking Symbols. A Critique of Sperber (1929),” Man (n.s.), 18:
260–268.
Tuan, Yi-Fu. 1975. “Images and Mental Maps,” Annals of the Association of
American Geographers, 65(2): 205–213.
Turner, Mark (ed.). 2006. The Artful Mind: Cognitive Science and the Riddle of Human
Creativity. New York: Oxford University Press.
Turner, Mark. 2007. “Conceptual Integration,” In The Oxford Handbook of Cognitive
Linguistics. (Eds) Geeraerts, Dirk and Hubert Cuyckens. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Turner, Mark. 1999. “Forging Connections,” Computation for Metaphor, Analogy, and
Agents. (Ed.) Chrystopher Nehaniv. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 11–26. A volume in the
series Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
Turner, Mark. 2002. “The Cognitive Study of Art, Language, and Literature,” Poetics
Today, 23(1): 9–20.
Turner, Mark. 2007. “Conceptual Integration,” In The Oxford Handbook of Cognitive
Linguistics. (Ed.) Dirk Geeraerts and Hubert Cuyckens. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Turner, Mark. 2008a. “Frame Blending,” In Frames, Corpora, and Knowledge Representation. (Ed.) Favretti, Rema Rossini. Bologna: Bononia University Press, 13–32.
CSN version.
Turner, Mark. 2008b. “The Way We Imagine,” In Imaginative Minds. (Ed.) Ilona
Roth, Proceedings of the British Academy. London: Oxford University Press & the
British Academy.
Turner, Mark. 2010. “Blending Box Experiments, Build 1.0,” Available at: http://ssrn.
com/abstract=1541062 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1541062.
Turner, Mark and Gilles Fauconnier. 1995. “Conceptual Integration and Formal
Expression,” Metaphor and Symbolic Activity, 10(3): 183–203.
Turner, Mark and Gilles Fauconnier. 1999. “A Mechanism of Creativity,” Poetics
Today, 20(3): 397–418.
Turner, M. and Gilles Fauconnier. 2000. “Metaphor, Metonymy and Binding,” In
Barcelona 2000a: 77–90.
Urban, Hugh. 2001. Songs of Ecstasy: Tantric and Devotional Songs from Colonial
Bengal. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Urban, Hugh. 2003. Tantra: Sex, Secrecy, Politics and Power in the Study of Religion.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Urban, Hugh. 2006. Magia Sexualis: Sex, Magic, and Liberation in Modern Western
Esotericism. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Velankar, H.D. 1938. “R
. gvedic Similes, I: Similes of the Vamadevas (R
. V Man.d.ala
IV),” Journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, 14: 1–47.
Velankar, H.D. 1940. “R
. gvedic Similes, II: Similes of the Atris (R
. V Man.d.ala V),”
Journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, 16: 1–42.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

168

Bibliography

Velankar, H.D. 1963. “Similes in the Atharvaveda,” Journal of the Asiatic Society of
Bombay, 38: 19–43.
Velankar, H.D. 1969. “Word Economy and R
. gvedic Interpretation,” In Proceedings of
26th International Congress of Orientalists, 1964, 139–145. Wiesbaden. Also, Annals
of Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 45: 1–18.
Vasudeva, Somadeva. 2004. The Yoga of the Ma-linı-vijayottaratantra. Pondicherry:
Institut Français de Pondichéry.
Velasco-Sacristán, Marisol. 2010. “Metonymic Grounding of Ideological Metaphors:
Evidence from Advertising Gender Metaphors,” Journal of Pragmatics, 42: 64–96.
Vergote, Antoine. 1985. “The Symbolic Body and the Symbolic Symptom,” International
Journal of Psychology, 20: 419–437.
Wadia, Pheroze S. 1981. “The Aesthetic Nonnaturalism of Abhinavagupta: A
Non-Aristotelian Interpretation,” Philosophy East and West, 31(1): 71–77.
Wagner, R. 1986. Symbols that Stand for Themselves. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
Walsh, R. 1989. “What is a Shaman? Deﬁnition, Origin, and Distribution,” The
Journal of Transpersonal Psychology, 21: 1–11.
Walsh, R. 1995. “Phenomenological Mapping: A Method for Describing and Comparing
States of Consciousness,” The Journal of Transpersonal Psychology, 27: 25–56.
Walton, Susan Pratt. 2007. “Aesthetic and Spiritual Correlations in Javanese Gamelan
Music,” The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 65(1): 31–41.
Warder, A.K. 1972. Indian Ka-vya Literature. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Warnock, Mary. 1976. Imagination. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Wayman, Alex. 1962. “Female Energy and Tantric Symbolism in the Buddhist Tantras,”
History of Religions, 2(1): 73–111.
Wedemeyer, Christian K. 2002. “Antinomianism and Gradualism: the Contextualization of the Practices of Sensual Enjoyment (Carya-) in the Guhyasama-ja Arya
Tradition,” International Journal of Buddhist Studies, 3: 181–195.
Wedemeyer, Christian K. 2012. Making Sense of Tantric Buddhism: History, Semiology,
and Transgression in the Indian Traditions. New York: University of Columbia Press.
Wheelock, Wade T. 1991. “The Mantra in Vedic and Tantric Ritual,” In Alper 1991:
96–122.
Whicher, Ian and David Carpenter. (Eds) 1993. Yoga: The Indian Tradition. New
York: Routledge.
Whicher, Ian and David Carpenter. 1998. The Integrity of the Yoga Darsana: A
Reconsideration of Classical Yoga. New York: State University of New York Press.
White, David Gordon. 1996. The Alchemical Body: Siddha Traditions in Medieval
India. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
White, David Gordon. (Ed.) 2001a [2000]. Tantra in Practice. Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass. Originally, New York: Princeton University Press.
White, David Gordon. 2001b. “Introduction,” See Tantra in Practice, 3–38.
White, David Gordon. 2003. Kiss of the Yoginı-: Tantric Sex in South Asian Contexts.
Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.
Wilson, D. and Dan Sperber. 1988. “Representations and Relevance,” In Mental
Representations: The Interface between Language and Reality. (Ed.) R. Kempson.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 133–153.
Worthen, J.B. 2006. “Resolution of Discrepant Memory Strengths: An Explanation of
the Eﬀects of Bizarreness on Memory,” In Distinctiveness and Memory. (Eds) Hunt,
R.R. and J.B. Worthen. New York: Oxford University Press, 133–156.

Bibliography

169

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Wulﬀ, Donna M. 1984. Drama as a Mode of Religious Realization: The
Vidagdhama-dhava of Ru-pagosva-mı-. Chico, CA: Scholars Press.
Wulﬀ, Donna M. 1986. “Religion in a New Mode: The Convergence of the Aesthetic
and the Religious in Medieval India,” Journal of the American Academy of Religion,
54(4): 673–688.
Yu, Ning. 2001. “Chinese Metaphors of Thinking,” In Palmer, Gary B., Goddard,
Cliﬀ, and Lee, Penny (Eds). Special Issue on “Talking About Thinking Across
Languages,” Cognitive Linguistics, 14: 141–165.
Yu, Ning. 2004. “The Eyes for Sight and Mind,” Journal of Pragmatics, 36: 663–686.
Zimmer, Heinrich. 1992 [1972]. Myths and Symbols in Indian Art and Civilization.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Index I
Deity Names and Technical Terms

abhaya 38, 39, 72
abhidha- 53
adbhuta 127, 133, 137
Aditi 57, 61
Aditya 57
Advaita 53, 103, 118, 158
Agama 68
Aghora 101
Aghorakubjika- 88
Agni 37, 57, 99, 108, 111
Aks.obhya 100, 130
analogy 16, 57, 66, 155, 161
Andhaka 96
.
alanka-ra 54–56
Amna-ya 76, 87, 90
Aniruddha 104
anubha-va 127, 141, 142
Apara- 65, 148
Ardhana-rı-śvara 41, 64, 84, 103, 112, 140
a-ropita 55
a-ropya 55
artha-naranya-sa 55
Aśvinau 99
Bhadraka-lı- 45, 104, 111, 117
Bhagama-linı- 139, 142
Bhairava 21, 31, 32, 33, 36, 39, 42, 43,
45, 49, 60, 62, 90, 95, 106, 108, 112,
116, 117, 132, 133, 135, 137, 139, 167
Bharata 38, 105, 123, 127, 129, 132, 133
bhaya-naka 127, 133, 135
bha-vana- 17, 22, 50
Bhı-s.an.a 132, 135
bhra-nti 131
bhu-taśuddhi 70, 76
Bhuvaneśvarı- 93
bı-bhatsa 127, 130, 133, 135, 137
bimba 118
bimba-pratibimba 103, 118

blend 5–7, 25, 81, 82, 99, 103, 104, 148
Brahma- 21, 31, 96, 103, 114, 133, 137
Bra-hmı- 133
buddhi 31
cakra 18, 20, 21, 26, 37, 43, 47, 85, 87,
90, 91, 97, 110, 165
Cakrasam
. vara 72, 135
Ca-mun.d.a- 132, 136
Can.d.a 132
Can.d.eśvara 114
Carcika- 88, 98, 99
Chagala-n.d.a 99
Chinnamasta- 137, 138
chummaka- 39, 40
Cognition 13, 15, 16, 20, 25, 33, 43, 53,
55, 62, 65, 68, 72, 74, 79, 105, 114,
128, 131, 143
Compression 13, 22, 24, 81, 83, 87,
96, 155
concept 7, 8, 14, 17, 22–26, 32–36,
44, 49, 52–76, 79–87, 95–99, 105,
114, 139
conceptual blending 1, 5–7, 16, 25, 41,
44, 79–104, 147, 148, 153–65
consciousness 2, 3, 6–8, 15, 17, 20–26,
31, 32, 42, 43, 47, 56, 58, 59, 60–87,
90, 102–7, 112, 114, 126–34, 139–41,
144–49, 163, 168
- D
. akinı 85, 86, 97
Daks.a 104
de-differentiation 16
Dhu-ma-vatı- 140
dhvani 123, 141, 151, 162, 167
Dikpa-la 97
double-scope 81, 82, 84, 96–99
dr.g dı-ks.a- 106
dual-processing 16

Index I: Deity Names and Technical Terms

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Durga- 41, 43, 61, 84, 85, 97, 104,
134–36
Dviran.d.a 99
eidetic image 16, 26
ekajı-va 103
Eka-ntava-sinı- 94
emergent structure 7, 62, 81, 82, 97,
152, 115
Gaganama-linı- 88
Gan.eśa 60, 96, 145
Garud.a 104
Ga-yatrı- 104
Ghoralaks.mı- 91
Guhyaka-lı- 59, 76, 92, 93, 101, 116
gun.a 60, 65, 87, 90
guruvaktra 42
Ha-kinı- 85
Harihara 93, 103
ha-sya 127, 133
Hayagrı-va 101
iccha- 72
Indra 37, 38, 43, 44, 50, 57, 108,
118, 133
input 7, 15–17, 41, 73, 80–83, 96–98,
103, 106, 146, 147, 157
Iśvara 18
jagada-nanda 87, 126
ja-garan.a 67
Jayalaks.mı- 91
jugupsa- 127
Jyes.t.ha- 72
Jyes.t.ha-laks.mı- 91, 98
Kaila-sa 68
Ka-kinı- 86
Ka-la-gni 71
ka-lapurus.a 99
.
Ka-lasankars.in.-ı 100
Kalı 88, 94, 100, 104
Kalpana- 17, 50, 145
Ka-madeva 48
Kamala- 37, 50
Ka-meśvara 18
Ka-meśvarı- 18
Ka-pa-lika 62, 85, 93, 112, 115
Karan.eśvarı- 62
karun.a 127, 133
Kaula 62, 134, 148
Kauśikı- 104, 105

171

kavaca 38, 39
krama 58, 59, 62, 90, 94, 95, 97, 111
kriya- 72
Krodha 71, 127, 132, 142
Kr.s.n.a 108, 117, 133
ks.udha- 131
Kubjeśvarı- 88, 95
Kubjika- 79, 80, 87–89, 95–97
Kuleśvara 62
Kun.d.alinı- 21, 43, 50, 67, 85, 87, 113,
116, 129, 165
Kurukulla- 142
La-kinı- 85, 86, 97
laks.an.a- 6, 53, 54, 75, 147
Laks.mı- 43, 48, 65, 87, 89–92, 94, 95, 97,
100, 142, 151
Lalita- 139, 142, 154
.
linga 42, 72, 105, 113, 114
Lokapurus.a 84
Lokeśvara 130
Ma-dhyamikas 75
Maha-ka-la 66, 67, 76, 99, 133
Maha-ka-lı- 88
Maha-laks.mı- 88, 95
Maha-ma-rı- 117
Maha-ma-ya- 131, 139
Maha-rtha 58, 59
maha-śu-nya 25
Maha-vidya- 21, 61, 76, 140
Maha-ya-na 44
Mahis.a 41
Ma-linı- 98
man.d.ala 1, 2, 5, 13–25, 31, 32,
36, 38, 41, 42, 47, 50, 51, 60,
61, 65, 71, 74, 80, 87, 89, 93, 97,
103, 104, 108, 117, 130–33, 138,
139, 142, 147
Man.ipura 37
Mantha-na 101
Mantra 1–4, 5, 8, 14–27, 35–38, 41–44,
47, 50, 51, 68, 71–74, 83, 84, 89,
95–100, 111, 115, 151, 154, 157, 162,
165–67, 169
mantra-ka-ya 73, 99
Manu 37
Ma-tariśvan 38, 50
Ma-tr.ka- 21, 104, 133
megablend 82, 84
metaphor 5–7, 9, 27, 32–34, 40, 48–76,
82–85, 90, 99, 105, 106, 108, 110–12,
114, 118, 135, 137, 140, 141, 144–47,
151–69

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

172

Index I: Deity Names and Technical Terms

metonym 5, 6, 32–45, 47–60, 72–76,
87, 89, 105, 106, 110, 114, 140,
144, 145–47, 152, 154–57, 159,
162–66, 168
meru 39
Mı-na-ks.-ı 108
mirror 48, 65, 88
mirror-image 66, 81, 102, 103, 105, 117,
135, 138
mirror-network 81–84, 96–99
moha 71, 130, 139
Mohinı- 133
Mohinı-laks.mı- 91, 92
mudra- 38, 100, 106, 157, 158,
160, 165
Naira-tma- 93
Narasim
. ha 95, 101
Nat.ara-ja 41, 96, 97, 112
nidra- 67, 131
nimes.a 68, 110
Nityaklinna- 139
nya-sa 14, 20, 69, 71
Para- 25, 65, 88, 98, 148
Para-para- 65, 88, 148
Pa-rvatı- 48, 65
Paśupati 63
photoshop 82, 95
Pina-kin 99
pin.d.a-brahma-n.d.a 103
.
pingala- (with -ıd.a-) 112
Pradyumna 104
Prajña- 44, 49, 50, 87
Prajña-pa-ramita- 44
praka-śa 43, 65, 147
prakr.ti 64, 65, 76, 88, 114
pralaya 129
Pramatha 133
pra-n.apratis.t.ha- 107
pratyabhijna- 50, 123, 125, 147, 149
.
Pratyangira- 91, 93, 94, 98, 100
Projection 14, 58, 80–83, 102, 103, 155
purus.a 64, 76, 84, 96, 99, 103, 108
Ra-kin.-ı 85, 86
rasa 8, 109, 110, 123–40, 144, 148, 153,
156, 161, 162
raudra 127, 130, 133, 135, 142, 157
Raudrı- 72
representation 8, 14, 23, 25, 40, 41, 80,
81, 105, 123, 154, 156, 163, 169
Rudra 127, 130, 133, 135, 142, 157
ru-paka 55, 75

Sada-śiva 18, 61, 67, 76, 93
Sadyoja-ta 101
Śaiva/ Śaivite 2, 21, 79, 89, 93, 95, 100,
109, 147, 152, 161
Śa-kambharı- 105
Śa-kinı- 85
Śakti 18, 20, 35, 43, 47, 53, 61, 64, 65,
72, 84, 86, 91, 105, 131, 142
Śaktilaks.mı- 91–94
samarasa 25
sama-sokti 55, 75
sama-veśa 66, 70, 124
.
Sa-nkhya 64, 69, 76, 114, 119, 151,
161, 165
Śa-rada- 37, 115
Sarasvatı- 43, 48, 65, 87, 115
sarva-mna-ya 95
Śata-ks.-ı 108
sattva 60, 64, 65, 87, 90, 124, 127–29
Siddhaca-mun.d.a- 94, 100
Siddhalaks.mı- 9, 80, 89–100
Siddhayogeśvarı- 88, 94, 95, 97, 98,
100, 101
Siddheśvarı- 94
siddhi 1, 26, 47, 48, 60, 90, 92, 117
Siddhiyoginı- 91
Siddhilaks.mı- 60, 92, 98, 99, 100, 167
Siddhika-lı- 90, 100
simplex 81
single-scope 81–84, 96
source–target 82–84
spanda 65, 66, 76, 118, 147, 151
Śrı- Cakra 17, 18, 20, 21, 39, 46, 100
Śrı-vatsa 116
.
śr.nga-ra 133, 142
Śruti 111
stha-yin 127, 141, 142
Sudarśana 109
synesthesia 16, 25, 52, 161
tamas 60, 64, 65, 71, 87, 90, 124, 127,
128, 139
tarjanı- 38, 72, 90, 100
Tatha-gata 30, 142, 150
Tatpurus.a 101
Trailokyasundarı--laks.mı- 91
Trika 58, 63–65, 87, 94, 123, 134, 135
Tripura- 16–22, 26, 27, 37, 39, 48, 49,
71, 76, 90–93, 98, 109–13, 125, 132,
139–42, 148, 167
Tripurabhairavı- 98
Ulu-kavadana- 132
Uma- 88, 89

Index I: Deity Names and Technical Terms

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Unmatta 132
unmes.a 68, 110
upama- 55
uttha-na 67
Va-c 111, 114
Vairocana 130
Vais.n.avite 89, 95, 100, 141, 154, 158,
159, 162
Vajrakubjika- 95
Vajrasattva 84
Vajraya-na 44, 93
Va-ma- 72, 111
Va-madeva 101, 168
Va-meśvarı- 111
vara 38, 39, 72
Vara-ha 61
Varun.a 61, 108
Va-sudeva 104
Veda 44, 57, 61, 76, 111

173

vedha 67
Veta-la 60, 95
vimarśa 43, 50, 64–67, 147
Vı-rabhadra 104, 117
Vı-rakubjika- 87, 88
Vis.n.u 21, 95, 96, 133
Viśvalaks.mı- 91–93
Viśvaru-pa 92, 108
Vr.tra 57
vyabhica-rin 127
Ya-kinı- 85
Yama 43, 133, 137
Ya-mala 63
Yoganidra- 67, 131
Yogeśvarı- 94, 100
Yoginı-s 39, 62, 79, 80, 85–87, 96–98,
154, 169
yoni 37, 38, 42, 67, 72, 105,
113, 114

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Index II
Scholars Cited

Aarts, Jan M.G. 151
Abhinavagupta 76, 123, 124, 130, 140,
141, 148, 156, 163, 165, 168
Acherd, M. 163
Addis, D. R. 22, 165
Akhter, Ashen 26, 151
Akins, K. 163
Aklujkar, A. 141
Alper, H. P. 4, 50, 151, 154, 162,
163, 169
Amaladass, Anand S. J. 141, 151
Amr.ta-nanda 123
Ananda 123
Argyris, C. 27, 152
Auer, Peter 76, 152
Avalon, Arthur 50, 151, 152
Babb, Lawrence 18, 152
Bachrach, S. 165
Bagchi, Prabodh Chandra 76, 152
Bailly, C. R., 76, 100, 152, 164
Bakhtin, M. 61, 76, 146, 152
Ballantyne, J. R. 55, 141, 152
Barcelona, A. 49, 152, 155, 164, 168
Beck, G. 152, 158
Benjaﬁeld, John G. 26, 152
Benyon, D. 161
Bergaigne, Abel 76, 152
Berg, Charles. 115, 152
Bharata 123, 127, 129, 132, 133
Bhattacharya, Siva Prasad 152
Bhattacharyya, Benoytosh 141,
150, 152
Bhattacharya, D. C. 50, 152
Biernacki, Loriliai viii, 27, 152
Bilimoria, P. viii
Black, Max 50, 152
Blank, Andreas 49, 152
Bloomﬁeld, Maurice 76, 152

Bohm, David 7, 102, 103
Bolle, C. W. 50, 152
Bosch, F. D. K. 49, 153
Boyer, P. 48
Brann, Eva T. H. 26, 153
Brook, A. 163
Brooks, Douglas 4, 26, 153
Brown, George W. 142, 153
Brown, Norman 153
Brown, Richard 69, 153
Brown, Robert 142, 158
Burke, Kenneth 141, 153
Cable, Cynthia 159
Calbert, Joseph A. 151
Carpenter, David 158, 169
Carson, S. H. 153
Carston, R. 165
Casey, Edward 26, 153
Chandra, Lokesh 142
Chari, V. K. 141, 142, 153
Chaturvedi, R. 150
Chaudhury, Pravas Jivan 141, 153
Cienki, Alan 99, 153
Clooney, Francis X. 142, 153
Coburn, Thomas B. 153
Colston, Herbert L. 157
Cooey, Paula M. 76, 153
Coomaraswamy, A. K. 49, 153
Cooper, L. 165
Costello, John 164
Coulson, Seana 83, 98, 99, 153, 154
Coward, Harold 50, 154
Crocker, J. C. 165
Croft, William 34, 49, 50, 154
Crooke, William 49, 154
Cuneo, 140
Cuyckens, H. 167
Czerny, Robert 164

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Index II: Scholars Cited
Dalal, C. D. 150
Daniélou, Alain 76, 114, 118, 154
Davidson, Ronald M.
Davis, Richard 118, 154
Dawa-samdup, Kazi 142, 154
Dehaene, S. 23, 154
Dehejia, Vidya 154
De Mendoza, Ruiz 163
De Sousa, R. 141, 154
Devy, G. N. 141, 154
Dhawan, Savitri 98, 154
Díez Velasco, Olga Isabel 49, 154
Dikshitar, D. R. 50, 154
Dimock, E. C. 76, 154
Dirven, René 49, 50, 154, 163
Donald, Merlin 32, 44, 45, 49, 99, 154
Dupuche, John R. 76, 155
Dwivedi, V. 150, 151
Dyczkowski, Mark 76, 98, 99, 108, 155
Eck, Diana 118, 155
Eco, Umberto 143, 155
Einstein, G. O. 26, 155
Emanatian, Michelle 140, 155
English, Elizabeth 155
Esgate, A. 26, 155
Farretti, R. R. 167
Fauconnier, G. 4, 16, 25, 49, 73, 76, 79,
80, 81, 95–99, 147, 155, 156, 168
Faure, Bernard 156
Fernandez, James 164
Feyaerts, Kurt 50, 156
Findley, Ellison Banks 50, 156
Fingesten, Peter 118, 156
Flanagan, Owen 26, 156
Flood, Gavin 4, 50, 76, 156
Fludernik, Monika 99, 156
Forceville, Charles 76, 141, 156
Francoso, Edson 157
Fuertes-Olivera, Pedro A. 164
Geeraerts, D. 50, 154, 156, 163, 167
Germine, Mark 118, 156
Gerow, Edwin 55, 141, 156
Gibbs, Raymond W. 33, 49, 50, 73, 76,
155, 156, 157
Gitomer, David L. 141, 142, 157
Gnoli, Raniero 140, 157
Goddard, Cliff 53, 157, 169
Gode, P. K. 157
Gokhale, V. V. 141
Gonda, Jan 49, 50, 157
Goossens, Louis 157

Gopa-lakrishna-yya 49
Gopinatha Rao, T. A. 50, 157
Gosva-mı-, Ru-pa 141
Goudriaan, T. 4, 157
Grady, Grady 98, 99, 157
Grönbold, Günter 26, 157
Groninger, L. D. 26, 157
Groome, D. 26
Guenther, Herbert V. 76, 157, 158
Gupta, Bharat 158
Gupta, Bina 76, 158
Gupta, Sanjukta 4, 118, 157
Gyatso, Janet 158
Haarh, Erik 50, 158
Halle, M. 159
Hanks, William F. 141, 158
Harper, Katherine 142, 158
Harris, Paul 26, 158
Harsch, Paul 50, 158
Hart, Christopher 4, 158
Hawley, John Stratton 50, 158, 162
Hayes, G. A. viii, 99, 158, 159
Heilijger-Seelens, D. 98, 159
Hernández, Pérez 50, 164
Hernstein, R. J. 99, 159
Higgins, K. M. 141, 159
Hiltebeitel, Alf 118, 119, 159
Hogan, Patrick Colm 141, 159
Honeywell, J. A. 141, 159
Holland, Dorothy 159
Honig, W. K. 99, 165
Hook, K. 161
Hugh-Jones, S. 161
Hull, R. F. C. 160
Hussain, Mazhar 141, 159
Hutwohl, Robert 157
Ichihara, S. 159
Ihde, Don 143
Igarashi, Yuka 76, 159
Ikegami, Y. 49
Ingalls, Daniel H. H. 140–42, 159
Isola, Philip 24, 27, 159
Iyer, K. A. 26, 159
Izutsu, T. 50, 159
Jackson, Roger R. 76, 160
Jaganna-tha 140, 141
Jakobson, Roman 34, 50, 159
Jarvie, I. C. 50
Jayaratha 123
Jha, D. 151
Jha, Kishor 150

175

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

176

Index II: Scholars Cited

Jhalkikar, V. 150
Jha, M. 151
Johnson, A. M. 15, 160
Johnson, C. J. 160
Johnson, Mark 32, 33, 52, 56, 58, 60,
68, 76, 83, 160, 161
Johnson, Williard 76, 160
Jones, Clifford R. 49, 160
Jung, Carl G. 50
Kak, R. 101, 151
Kali, Devdatta 150
Kaviraj, G. 151
Kinsley, David R. 50, 111, 119, 160
Kirfel, Willibald 50, 160
Kitegawa, N. 159
Koestler, Arthur 76
Kosambi, D. D. 141
Kosslyn, Stephen 26
Kotre, S. M. 157
Kövecses, Zoltán 76, 140, 141, 160
Kramrisch, Stella 119, 160
Krauss, Kristin 99, 161
Kreijger, Hugo E. 100, 161
Kripal, Jeffrey J. 161
Krishnamoorthy, K. 141, 161
Kristiansen, G. M. 163
Ks.emara-ja 31, 32, 49
Kumar, P. 151
Kunjunni Raja, K. 161
Kuppuswami, Appiah 151, 161
Laidlaw, J. 161
Lakoff, George 4, 32, 33, 49, 50, 52, 56,
58, 60, 68, 76, 83, 161
Laks.mı-dhara 109, 123
Lambek, Michael 118, 161
Langar, E. J. 26
Larson, Gerald James viii, 76, 118, 124,
141, 161
Lawrence, David Peter 161
Laxmana, V. 151
Leach, E. 115, 161
Lee, P. 169
Leibniz 102
Levin, David Michael 106, 161
Liddell, Scott K. 99, 161
Lidke, Jeffrey 26, 161
Loveland, Donald H. 159
Lukes, Dominic 158
Maglio, Paul P. 99, 161
Malamoud, Charles 141, 162
Mammat.a 141

Mandan, T. N. 162
Marlos, René 24
Masson, J. L. 76, 140, 141, 159, 162
Matlock, Teenie 99, 161
McCrea, Lawrence 141, 162
McDaniel, M. A. 26
McGinn, Colin 26, 162
McLaughlin, K. 164
McNeill, David 161
Meister, Michael 50, 161
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice 69, 76
Merton, Alice 165
Mica, Ishino 162
Miller, Barbara 159
Miller, G. 118
Misra, S. 150
Mitra, Pramada Dasa 55, 141, 152
Mittal, Sushil viii
Modi, P. M. 50
Mookerjee, Ajit 118, 141, 162
Moore, Rebecca viii
Mukerjee, Radhakamal 162
Müller-Ortega, Paul 76, 162
Munro, A. 161
Nagatomo, Shigenori 76, 162
Nambudiri, I. R. 165
Nandi, Tapasvi S. 162
Narayanan, Vasudha 50, 162
Natu, Ganesha 150
Na-yaka Bhat.ta 124
Nehaniv, C. 167
Nelson, Lance 141, 162
Oakley, Todd 83, 98, 154
Oberhammer, Gerhard 50, 162
Oberlies, Thomas viii
Obeyesekere, Gananath 115, 118, 162
O’Flaherty, Wendy Doniger 76,
118, 162
Olivelle, Patrick 162
Olivia, Aude 159
Ortony, A. 161, 162, 163
O’Shaughnessy, Brian 26, 163
Padoux, André 26, 50, 163
Paivio, Alan 14, 26, 83, 163
Pal, Pratapaditya 100, 163
Pandeya, J. S. 150
Pandey, K. C. 140, 141, 163
Panther, Klaus-Uwe 49, 50, 163,
164, 165
Papafragau, Anna 50, 163
Parajuli, B. S. 151

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Index II: Scholars Cited
Parikh, D. 24, 159
Patañjali 17, 26
Patankar, R. B. 141, 163
Patwardhan, M. V. 140, 141, 159, 162
Pauvels, P. 157
Peirsman, Yves 50, 154, 163
Peñas, B. 164
Perkins, F. T. 24, 163
Pfander, Stefan 76, 152
Pierce, Charles 143
Pollock, Sheldon 141, 163
Pörings, Ralf 154
Pott, Pieter Hendrik 50, 163
Prasa, V. 151
Pribram, Karl 7, 102
Prinz, J. 23, 163
Proudfoot, Wayne 76, 164
Pylyshyn, Zenon 26, 164
Quinn, Naomi 159, 164
Rabe, Michael D. 26, 164
Radden, G. 49, 50, 163–65
Raghavan, V. 141, 164
Rai, R. K. 150
Rana, D. S. 141, 151, 164
Ratie, Isabelle 50
Rao, Gopinath 4
Rastogi, N. 151
Richardson, John T. E. 25, 164
Ricour, Paul 9, 74, 164
Robert, Allen 164
Roberts, Mary Nooter 27, 164
Roth, I. 167
Roy, Ksitis 158
Rudzka-Ostyn, A. M. 157
Ruff, Jeffrey viii
Ruiz de Mendoza Ibáñez, F. J. 34, 49,
50, 82, 164
Ruwet, N. 49, 164
Sacks, Sheldon E. 50, 164
Sandelands, L. E. 27, 165
Sanderson, Alexis 62, 100, 165
Sapir, J. David 165
Sartre, Jean-Paul 26, 165
Śa-strı-, K. 151
Sastri, M. 151
Śa-strı-, P. 150
Śa-strı-, R. 150
Śa-strı-, Udaya Vı-ra 76, 165
Saunders, E. Dale 49, 165
Schacter, Daniel L. 22, 165
Schechner, Richard 141, 165

177

Schon, D. A. 27, 152
Schwartz, Jason viii
Scruton, Roger 26, 165
Seto, Ken-ichi 165
Sharma, B. R. 50, 165
Shastri, H. 151
Shastri, J. L. 150
Shastri, P. S. 76, 165
Shastry, R. A. 150
Shaw, Miranda 50, 142, 165
Shepard, R. 26, 165
Shore, Bradd 76, 165
Shulman, David 165
Siegel, R. K. 99, 165
Silburn, Lilian 50, 142, 165
Simon-Venderbergen, J. V. 157
Sinding, Michael 99, 165
Singh, Jaideva 151
Singh, Nag Sharan 151
Skora, Kerry Martin 50, 76, 140, 166
Slingerland, Edward 99, 165
Smith, Colin 162
Smith, Frederick M. 50, 141, 166
Somayajipad, C. V. 165
Sondergaard, Morten 99, 166
Song, Nam Sun 50, 166
Spence, Charles 159
Sperber, Dan 49, 50, 76, 166, 169
Srinivasan, Doris 118, 166
Staal, Frits 50, 160, 166
Stablein, R. E. 27, 165
Stange, Paul 141, 166
Steen, G. J. 76, 157
Sternberg, R. J. 26, 166
Strauss, E. 166
Strawson, P. F. 22, 166
Subrahmanian, V. K. 142, 166
Swan, Deanne 99, 153
Sweetser, Eve 98, 166
Tagore, G. V. 150
Tall, David 27, 166
Taylor, M. 34
Tengelyi, László 166
Thampi, G. B. Mohan 141, 166
Thomas, N. J.T. 165
Thornburg, Linda 50, 163
Timalsina, Sthaneshwar 4, 26, 27, 9, 50,
88, 140, 142, 144, 149, 154, 156, 161,
165, 167
Timm, Jeffrey R. 141, 167
Todd, J. Jay 24, 167
Toren, C 49, 167
Torralba, A. 159

178

Index II: Scholars Cited

Tuan, Yi-Fu 27, 167
Turner, Mark 4, 44, 45, 49, 50, 73, 76,
80, 81, 95–99, 167, 168

Downloaded by [University of California, San Diego] at 12:19 08 February 2017

Uchida, S. 165
Urban, Hugh 76, 168
Vanpanys, J. 157
Vasudeva, Somadeva 26, 168
Velankar, H. D. 76, 168
Velasco-Sacristán, Marisol 50, 73, 168
Vergote, Antoine 168
Viśvana-tha 54, 55, 129, 140, 142
Vinner, Shlomo 27, 166
Wadia, Pheroze S. 141, 168
Wagner, R. 49, 168
Walsh, R. 50, 168
Walton, Susan Pratt 141, 168

Warder, A. K. 168
Warnock, Mary 26, 168
Wayman, Alex 50, 168
Wedemeyer, Christian K. 168
Wheelock, Wade T. 50, 169
Whicher, Ian 26, 158, 159
White, David Gordon viii, 4, 98, 164
Wilkinson, Robert 141, 159
Wilson, D. 76, 169
Worthen, J. B. 26, 169
Wulff, Donna M. 141, 158,
162, 169
Xiao, J. 159
Yu, Ning 33, 106, 169
Zalta, Edward 165
Zimmer, H. 117, 118, 132, 169

