[]

Utpaladeva,

Philosopher of Recognition

Utpaladeva,

Philosopher of Recognition

Edited by

Raffaele Torella

Bettina Bäumer

[]

Cataloging in Publication Data — DK

[Courtesy: D.K. Agencies (P) Ltd. <docinfo@dkagencies.com>]

International Seminar on “Utpaladeva, Philosopher of

Recognition” (2010 : Indian Institute of Advanced Study)

Utpaladeva, philosopher of recognition / edited by Raffaela

Torella, Bettina Bäumer.

pages cm

Papers presented at an International Seminar on

“Utpaladeva, Philosopher of Recognition”, held at Indian

Institute of Advanced Study during 20-21 August 2010.

Includes bibliographical references and index.

ISBN: 9788124610794

1. Utpala, active 900-950 — Congresses. 2. Kashmir

Śaivism — Doctrines — Congresses. 3. Hindu philosophy —

Congresses. I. Torella, Raffaele, editor. II. Bäumer, Bettina,

1940- editor. III. Indian Institute of Advanced Study.issuing

body, host institution. IV. Title.

BL1281.1545.I58 2010 DDC 294.5513 23

ISBN: 978-81-246-1079-4

First published in India, 2021

© Indian Institute of Advanced Study, Shimla.

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or
transmitted, except brief quotations, in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any
information storage or retrieval system, without prior written
permission of the copyright holders, indicated above, and the
publishers.

The views expressed in this volume are those of the contributors, and
are not necessarily those of the publishers.

Published by:

The Secretary

Indian Institute of Advanced Study

Rashtrapati Nivas, Summerhill, Shimla - 171 005

Phones: (0177) 283 1379; Fax: 283 1389

Email: proiias@gmail.com

Website: www.iias.org

&

D.K. Printworld (P) Ltd.

Regd. Office: Vedaśrī, F-395, Sudarshan Park

(Metro Station: Ramesh Nagar), New Delhi – 110 015

Phones: (011) 2545 3975, 2546 6019; Fax: (011) 2546 5926

e-mail: indology@dkprintworld.com

Website: www.dkprintworld.com

Printed by: D.K. Printworld (P) Ltd., New Delhi

Preface

Utpaladeva or Utpalācārya (c. 925-975) is one of the greatest
philosophers that India has produced, but he is hardly known in India
itself. After Somānanda (c. 900-950) who laid the foundation for the
philosophy of Recognition (Pratyabhijñā Darśana1) with his Śivadṛṣṭi,
Utpaladeva established this school by his philosophical works:
Īśvarapratyabhijñā-kārikā and Vṛtti, composed at the same time, and,
subsequently, in turn commented upon in a long and complex Vivr̥ti, which
has come down to us only in fragments; the Siddhitrayī, three terse
treatises on specific subjects (Ajaḍapramātṛsiddhi “Proof of the
sentient knower”, Sambandhasiddhi “Proof of relation”; Īśvarasiddhi
“Proof of the Lord”); and a Vṛtti on the Śivadṛṣṭi. Besides authoring
philosophical works, Utpaladeva was also a mystical poet, as expressed
in his splendid hymn collection, Śivastotrāvalī. The Pratyabhijñā
philosophy was continued by Utpaladeva’s disciple Lakṣmaṇagupta (of whom
nothing has come down to us) and by Lakṣmaṇagupta’s disciple, the great
Abhinavagupta (c. 975–1025) who composed two extensive commentaries on
the Pratyabhijñā, and took it as the theoretical basis for his Trika
synthesis in the Tantrāloka.

On 20-21 August 2010, an international seminar was held at the Indian
Institute of Advanced Study (IIAS), Shimla, on “Utpaladeva, Philosopher
of Recognition”, organized by Raffaele Torella and Bettina Bäumer, with
the participation of scholars from India and Europe. The participants
were R. Torella (Rome), B. Bäumer (Varanasi–Salzburg), K.D. Tripathi
(Varanasi), G.C. Tripathi (Delhi), D. Cuneo (Cambridge), M.H. Zaffar
(Srinagar) and A. Wenta (Shimla–Oxford). At the very last moment, other
prospective participants — N. Rastogi (Lucknow), R. Tripathi (Delhi), I.
Ratié (Paris) and Y. Kawajiri (Kyoto) — couldn’t come, but have sent in
their papers.

Two articles by Raffaele Torella, previously published in two
Felicitation Volumes not easily available in India, have been added as
Appendices. They contain studies on Utpaladeva’s Vivr̥ti, showing the
central role of Utpaladeva in the elaboration of the Pratyabhijñā
philosophy: as we can see from the extant parts of the Vivr̥ti, in most
cases Abhinavagupta will simply follow and develop the lines of Utpala’s
complex arguments.

It is high time that the genius of Utpaladeva is rediscovered, and he is
given the due place in the history of Indian thought as well as in the
intellectual and spiritual dimensions of our time.

Raffaele Torella

Bettina Bäumer

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 On the Pratyabhijñā Darśana chapter in the Sarvadarśanasaṃgraha, see
Torella 2011: 212-23.

Contents

Preface

1. Importance of Utpaladeva: An Introduction

– Raffaele Torella

2. Viṣam apy amr̥tāyate . . . Paramādvaita in the Mystical Hymns of the
Śivastotrāvalī

– Bettina Bäumer

3. Detonating or Defusing Desire: From Utpaladeva’s Ecstatic Aesthetics
to Abhinavagupta’s Ecumenical Art Theory*

– Daniele Cuneo

4. New Fragments of the Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti

– Yohei Kawajiri

5. Utpala’s Insights into Aesthetics and His Impact on Abhinavagupta’s
Aesthetic Speculation*

– Navjivan Rastogi

6. Some Hitherto Unknown Fragments of Utpaladeva’s Vivr̥ti (I): On the
Buddhist Controversy Over the Existence of Other Conscious Streams*

– Isabelle Ratié

7. Utpaladeva’s Proof of God On the Purpose of the Īśvarasiddhi*

– Isabelle Ratié

8. Alaṁkāras in the Stotras of Utpaladeva

– Radhavallabh Tripathi

9. The Twelve Kālīs and Utpaladeva’s Appraisal of the Sensory Experience

– Aleksandra Wenta

Appendix I*

I. Studies on Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vivr̥ti

Part I: Anupalabdhi and Apoha in a Śaiva Garb**

– Raffaele Torella

Appendix II*

II. Studies on Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vivr̥ti

Part II: What Is Memory?

– Raffaele Torella

Contributors

Index*

1

Importance of Utpaladeva

An Introduction

Raffaele Torella

The Pratyabhijñā provides non-dual Śaivism of Kashmir with a
“philosophy”. A presentation of the Pratyabhijñā doctrines involves,
first and foremost, giving voice to one of the most original and
peculiar components of India’s philosophical and religious scenario from
medieval times down to our own: what is known in the West as “Tantrism”.
It will be necessary to stretch a discreet veil over the incautious
remarks of a well-known scholar like Georg Feuerstein:1

Tantrism’s contribution to philosophy is negligible. Its unicity lies
wholly within the practical sphere, the sādhana. From a philosophical
point of view, there is no hiatus between Tantrism and previous
traditions. Buddhist Tantrism rests substantially on the foundations of
the Mādhyamika school of Mahāyāna, and its Hindu counterpart on those of
the cognate Advaita-Vedānta.

In actual fact, Pratyabhijñā, which provides the theoretical basis for
all Hindu Tantrism, constitutes one of the highest and most original
moments of Indian thought (it has, moreover, very little to do with
Vedānta). The principal aim of the Pratyabhijñā philosophers was to
allow the Tantric Śaiva sects to emer­ge from the dimen­sion of
restricted circles, often devoted to transgressive practices, and
establish themselves in the stratum of so­cial nor­mality, by
internalizing, or in any case cir­cumscrib­ing, their own specific
dif­ferences. Their main addressees were no more the ascetics, but,
typically, the householders. As a consequence, the Pratyabhijñā engages
in a far-reaching dialogue with Indian philosophy of its time, accepting
its modalities and rules. The initial nucleus comprises non-dualistic
Śaivite scriptures, the Bhairava Tantras — Bhairava being the terrible
form of the God Śiva, in whom cruelty and violence are metaphors for
rampant energy, far distant from the unmoving and bloodless deities of
Vedānta. Bhairava coincides with the “I” of every creature. In first
addressing the notion of “I”, so much disliked by Brāhmanic thought,
non-dualist Śaivism and in primis Utpaladeva implicitly state the
centrality of free movement as against the always lurking reification
connected to the notion of ātman, the I as substance. As compared to the
I — the Supreme Consciousness — the flow of the phenomenal world is not
a (bad) dream from which one must awake as soon as possible, but the
spontaneous manifestation of the Absolute itself. The concept of māyā,
central to Vedānta, is not eliminated: māyā is taken to be the power of
the Lord, even his highest power, otherwise known as svātantryaśakti
(power of freedom), and svātantryavāda (doctrine of freedom) becomes one
of the favourite names for this school.

Utpaladeva inaugu­rates what was to be­come a salient fea­ture of the
whole Trika in Abhinavagupta’s syn­thesis: name­ly, the ten­den­cy not
to con­stitute a monolithic doctrine and a world of religious
ex­perience to op­pose en bloc everyth­ing that does not coin­cide with
it (as in the ekāntin “absolutistic” trends) but to dis­tin­guish
planes, which are hierarchi­cal­ly or­dered but in which the “higher”
does not automati­cal­ly can­cel the “lower” (as Somānanda had al­ready
said, Śiva is everywhere, even in dif­feren­tia­tion, pain and hell).
This is the perspec­tive of the Paramādvaita “Supreme Non-Duality”, such
an elevated view­point that it does not fear what is dif­ferent from
it­self, is not put in a criti­cal posi­tion by it, is not forced to
make a choice.

While Somānanda is considered the founder of the Pratyabhijñā, its
full-fledged elaboration is due to Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta.
Somānanda’s Śivadr̥ṣṭi is to be considered the first philosophical work
of Kashmirian Śaiva Advaita,2 its only predecessor being the
Spanda-Kārikā, in which however the experiential and scriptural approach
largely prevails over philosophical elaboration. The Śivadr̥ṣṭi is
unanimously recognized as the first work of the Pratyabhijñā school,
despite the fact that the word pratyabhijñā does not even occur in it
(at least in its pregnant meaning). Abhinavagupta at the beginning of
his Vimarśinī on the Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Kārikā does not hesitate to say
that Utpaladeva’s masterwork is in fact only a “reflected image” of the
Śivadr̥ṣṭi.3 This is, of course, not to be taken literally, for, although
the Śivadr̥ṣṭi was a powerful source of inspiration for Utpaladeva, it is
only with the Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Kārikā that the Pratyabhijñā becomes a
very original and elaborate philosophical system. In the
Somānanda–Utpaladeva –(Lakṣmaṇagupta)–Abhinavagupta triad it was the
latter who largely overshadowed his predecessors. Among the Pratyabhijñā
texts, Abhinavagupta’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vimarśinī became by far the
most “popular” — if I may use this adjective for one of the profoundest
and most sophisticated worldviews that India has ever produced. The main
victim of the success of the Vimarśinī was the extraordinarily important
Vivr̥ti or Ṭīkā by Utpaladeva, of which only fragments have survived.

The works of Abhinavagupta are well known, and his
Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vimarśinī and the Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vivr̥ti-Vimarśinī
(a commentary on Utpaladeva’s Vivr̥ti on his own
Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Kārikā and Vr̥tti) are generally considered the
standard works of the Pratyabhijñā.4 However, the role of Utpaladeva’s
Vivr̥ti as the real centre of gravity of Pratyabhijñā philosophy has
become more and more evident, since my discovery of a long fragment of
the Vivr̥ti, which I have edited and translated in a series of articles
(Torella 2007a-d, 2012). Now that it is possible to look, however
partially, into the Vivr̥ti, we realize that most of Abhinavagupta’s
ideas are just the development of what Utpaladeva had already expounded
there. As a consequence, we are no longer allowed to consider Utpaladeva
a mere predecessor of Abhinavagupta, as being the latter the great
master of Pratyabhijñā, but we must rather take Utpaladeva, particularly
with his Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vivr̥ti, as the real centre of gravity of the
system (see Torella 2014a) and Abhinavagupta mainly as his brilliant
commentator.

Highly interesting is Utpaladeva’s philosophical strategy, which the
later Pratyabhijñā authors will simply continue. Instead of dispersing
Pratyabhijñā’s philosophical energies against an undifferentiated
multiplicity of opponents, he very lucidly selects one, the most
prestigious philosophical and religious tradition of the Kashmir of that
time. For various reasons (the principal one probably being the will to
present the new Pratyabhijñā philosophers as the champions of the entire
Śaiva tradition against the main common antagonist), these privileged
opponents are the Buddhists, especially those belonging to the so-called
logical–epistemological school.5 While for Somānanda the Buddhists are
opponents just like many others, they are given a special status in the
work of Utpaladeva, for whom they, admired and attacked in an equally
strong way, are so to speak the most intimate enemies. The criticism of
their positions is to Utpaladeva of a substantial help in building and
refining the Pratyabhijñā philosophy.

The Buddhist epistemologists and Pratyabhijnā start from presuppositions
that appear — and are — absolutely irreconcilable: an impersonal world
of events on the one hand and, on the other, a world permeated and
vivified even in its seemingly most inert crannies by the dynamism of
the I (Śiva or Consciousness). Despite this, an undoubted fascination is
exerted by the rigour of the Buddhist epistemologists’ argumentation and
their dauntless critical capacity that uses its sharp and original
instruments on the doctrines of the most diverse opponents. The very air
of superiority that may sometimes be glimpsed in their opposition to all
others, though it does not fail occasionally to provoke a note of
sarcasm in the Śaiva masters, ends up by further enhancing their image.
This contributes toward causing them to be adopted by the Pratyabhijnā
authors, partly, so to speak, as a touchstone to test the soundness of
their theses, and partly as a whetstone to sharpen their dialectic arms.

Buddhist epistemology, in its struggle against realism (particularly of
Nyāya, but also of Mīmāṁsā and Sāṁkhya), is constantly concerned with
showing the fundamental importance of the mind in structuring reality,
in contrast to those who, with the aim of underlining the independent
nature of the external reality confronted by human experience, move in
the opposite direction — reducing the creative and formative role of
knowledge as far as possible and making it into a mere mirror that
records readymade realities outside itself, resulting in an unending
entification even of relations, qualities, etc. This reference to the
centrality of the mind must have been felt by Utpaladeva to be a strong
element of affinity, even though it was destined to have quite divergent
developments. After letting the Buddhist philosophers demolish the Nyāya
categories, he shows how the Buddhist alternative is in fact equally
inadequate. It does overcome Nyāya, but remains as though suspended in
mid-air, since it is proved — in the Buddhist fragmented and isolated
universe — to be incapable of accounting for the network and circularity
of human experience. The only way to save the Buddhist view from its
theoretical failure is to include it in a different field of reference,
represented by the omnipervasive dynamism of a free and “personal”
consciousness that coincides with the Supreme Lord, Śiva. In this way,
Utpaladeva achieves the result of both showing the superiority of
Pratyabhijñā to Buddhism and warning the Naiyāyikas (among whom the
Śaiva faith was most prevalent) not to count too much on their forces
alone, detached from those of the new Śaiva philosophers.

Through this subtle play of a declared basic disagreement with the
doctrines of Buddhist philosophers, a limited acceptance and purely
instrumental (or thought to be such) use of them, the masters of the
Pratyabhijñā end up being somehow drawn into their orbit. The
architecture of the Pratyabhijñā feels the effect of this. The very fact
that many problems are posed, more or less unwittingly, in Buddhist
terms to a certain extent prefigures their development and reduces
possible alternatives as regards solutions.

Also very interesting is Utpaladeva’s choice of the main ally, the
grammarian-philosopher Bhartr̥hari, though the latter had been fiercely
attacked precisely by Utpaladeva’s guru Somānanda (cf. Torella 2009).
Such a change of attitude, which in a broader sense is also a paradigm
change proper, does invest the problematic aspects of taking distance
from one’s own guru, and, at the same time, shows how the choice of the
opponents and allies may be the outcome of a definite plan rather than a
fact of mere liking or disliking some worldview.6 In order to undermine
the discontinuous universe of the Buddhists, Utpaladeva decides to avail
himself precisely of Bhartr̥hari’s doctrine, the language-imbued nature
of knowledge, which is meant to demolish Buddhism’s main foundation
stone, i.e. the unsurpassable gulf between the moment of sensation and
that of conceptual elaboration, representing, as it were, the very
archetype of the Buddhist segmented reality.

As far as the metaphysical background is concerned, there is nothing
essentially new in this doctrine — the scriptural sarvaśaktivilolatā
“effervescence of all powers (in any reality)” of the Śivadr̥ṣṭi (I.11b)
implicitly already contained it. But what Utpaladeva wanted to resort to
was not scriptural authority but an argument belonging to the shared
philosophical debate. Thus, the omnipervasiveness of language is the
epistemological version of the omnipervasiveness of Śiva, and at the
same time calls for integration into the spiritually dynamic Śaiva
universe.

Thus, some of the most famous, and crucial, verses of the
Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Kārikā originate.

The essential nature of light is reflective awareness; otherwise light,
though ‘coloured’ by objects, would be similar to an insentient reality,
such as the crystal and so on. — I.V.11; cf. Torella 2002: 118

Consciousness has as its essential nature reflective awareness; it is
the supreme Word that arises freely. It is freedom in the absolute
sense, the sovereignty of the supreme Self. — I.V.13; cf. Torella 2002:
120

Even at the moment of direct perception there is a reflective awareness.
How otherwise could one account for such actions as running and so on,
if they were thought of as being devoid of determinate awareness? —
I.V.19; cf. Torella 2002: 125

Un­like what oc­curs here and there in Somānanda’s Śivadr̥ṣṭi, in the
Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Kārikā any emo­tion­al colour­ing is banished. This
does not mean that Utpaladeva was sole­ly a philosopher: the
ex­traordi­nary in­ten­sity of his hymns, which were later to be
col­lected in the Śiva-Stotrāvalī and are still re­cited daily by the
Śaivas of Kash­mir, proves it.

The Shimla seminar has duly emphasized the universalistic approach of
the Pratyabhijñā philosophy: the Śaiva Āgama is just the culmination
peak of the universal Āgama, which, unlike the Veda, is not separated
from mankind by an unsurpassable gulf, but inhabits in the very heart of
any creature. The idea of the universality of revelation as the
interplay of four closely related concepts
prasiddhi–āgama–pratibhā–śabdana is developed by Abhinavagupta in the
Tantrāloka, Tantrasāra and Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vivr̥ti-Vimarśinī (cf.
Torella 2013a). But once again this may be considered merely the
development of what Utpaladeva says in his Vivr̥ti, while commenting upon
two ślokas (we might even surmise Utpaladeva’s authorship of them). It
is worthwhile to delve at some length into this important, if
comparatively less studied, aspect of Utpala’s thought.

prasiddhir āgamo loke yuktimān athavetaraḥ ।

vidyāyām apy avidyāyāṁ pramāṇam avigānataḥ ।।

prasiddhir avigītā hi satyā vāg aiśvarī matā ।

tayā yatra yadā siddhaṁ yat tad grāhyam aśaṅkitaiḥ ।।

Prasiddhi is what we commonly call āgama, which may be either congruent
with reason or not; it is a source of valid knowledge in the domain both
of vidyā and avidyā, provided that it is not contradicted. For the
non-contradicted prasiddhi is to be considered the true Voice of the
Lord. What is established by virtue of this Voice, within a certain
spatial/temporal condition, is to be accepted by those who are
trustful.7

In order to express such a concept, Utpaladeva needed a broader term
than pratibhā and less connoted than pratibhā by typically “mysterious”
overtones: prasiddhi, perhaps also because it furnished the occasion for
critically addressing the Mīmāṁsā, was indeed the ideal candidate. A
continuous line runs from the individually oriented prasiddhis which are
at work in the everyday experience of living beings and the
progressively higher prasiddhis, which give shape to the various
world-views, i.e. the various Āgamas — from the Veda to the Bauddha, the
Pāñcarātra, the Śaiva — culminating in the all-encompassing eka āgama
(Tantrāloka XXXV.24a, 30a, 35a, 37a). Prasiddhi (in Abhinava’s
elaboration, based on the Vivr̥ti) is the paradox of something both
coming from outside (ā-gama) and abiding in the depths of men’s
interiority. It is a content of our individuality for which we are not
responsible, since it is already present in the new-born creature. It is
not a fixed content, but a varying one, due to its interaction with the
other factors of individuality. In a sense, then, prasiddhi is not even
a content, being instead more akin in its essence to a “container”. At
the same time, rather than belonging to the “cognition” side it belongs
to the “action” side; it is the object of belief and the belief itself.
Again, it is not bound to remain an inner belief, but enacts specific
practical behaviours (Tantrāloka XXXV.15cd lokān vyavahārayet). In the
background lies the common Indian awareness that cognition alone is
insufficient to set humans in motion. Prasiddhi is belief in something,
adhesion to something; its most recurrent qualifications are dr̥ḍha
(firm), nirūḍha (deeply rooted). However, this “firmness” does not
derive from a conscious effort, but is innate, spontaneous, just as
spontaneous as the insightful intuition (pratibhā) that plays such a
great part in driving most of our actions. However, even this
spontaneity does not belong to the creature individually, but to its
shared background. Such a “background” of the creature is its being
ultimately rooted in universal consciousness, Śiva. This active divine
presence is what may also be called āgama, and has the form of the
innate language principle which imbues all cognitions and actions. It is
the divine Voice (vāc) of the Lord that speaks in living beings.

From Utpaladeva–Abhinavagupta’s conception of āgama, any parochial bias
is banned as it comprises all the existing āgamas, from the Vaiṣṇava to
the Buddhist (the Śaiva included). The immensely distant and
undecipherable āgama of Mīmāṁsā, the Veda, leaves here the place to the
internal and variegated āgamas of the Śaivas. Along with advaitācāra
(non-dual behaviour), such a far-reaching universalistic approach to
revelation constitutes the most insidious attack by Śaiva Tantrism to
Brāhmanical hegemony.

The work of Utpaladeva can be viewed as the very icon of the integration
of the rational and emotional sides of man: his extremely sophisticated
philosophical arguments are to be viewed side by side with his
passionate mystical poetry. His philosophy is characterized by this
unique blend of epistemology, metaphysics, religious experience,
linguistic philosophy and aesthetic speculation. Precisely to Utpaladeva
we do owe the entrance of aesthetics into philosophical–religious
speculation. His concept of camatkāra (wondrous enjoyment) marks a
higher level of experience, which leaves the reality and beauty of the
manifested world intact, but at same time projects it into a totality
whose centre is Supreme Consciousness. This will be later developed by
Abhinavagupta into a full-fledged aesthetic system, destined to become
the main stream of aesthetical speculation of pre-modern India as a
whole.

Lastly, Utpala’s work is a most conspicuous example of an essential
feature of Indian philosophy as a whole, which, however, has hardly been
duly highlighted: ceaseless interchange among the different schools,
lively confrontation with the opposite theories, tireless capacity of
self-reshaping accordingly.

References

Texts

Abhinavagupta, Īśvarapratyabhijñāvimarśinī, ed. Mukund Ram Sha­stri,
vols. I-II, KSTS XXII, XXXIII, Bombay, 1918-21.

Abhinavagupta, Īśvarapratyabhijñāvivr̥tivimarśinī, ed. Madhusudan Kaul
Sha­stri, vols. I-III, KSTS LX, LXII, LXV, Bombay 1938-43.

Abhinavagupta, Tantrāloka with Commentary by Rājānaka Jayaratha, edited
with notes by Madhusudan Kaul Shastri, vols. I-XII, KSTS XXIII, XXVIII,
XXX, XXXVI, XXXV, XXIX, XLI, XLVII, LIX, LII, LVII, LVIII,
Allahabad-Srinagar-Bombay 1918-38.

Bhartṛhari, Vākyapadīya (mūlakārikās), Bhartr̥haris Vākyapadīya, ed. W.
Rau, Abhandlungen für die Kunde des Morgenlandes, 42, Wiesbaden 1977.

Dignāga, Pramāṇasamuccaya, see Steinkellner 2005 and Jinendrabuddhi,
Viśālāmalavatī Pramāṇasamuccayaṭīkā.

Jinendrabuddhi, Viśālāmalavatī Pramāṇasamuccayaṭīkā, Chapter I. Part I:
Critical Edition, by E. Steinkellner, H. Krasser, H. Lasic, China
Tibetology Research Centre – Austrian Academy of Sciences,
Beijing-Vienna 2005.

Somānanda, Śivadr̥ṣṭi with the vr̥tti by Utpaladeva, ed. Pandit Madhusudan
Kaul Shastri, KSTS LIV, Srinagar 1934.

Utpaladeva, Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikā with svavr̥tti (see Torella 2002).

Translations and Studies

Bühnemann, Gudrun, 1980 “Identifizierung von Sanskrittexten
Śaṅkaranandanas”, Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens 24: 191-98.

Eltschinger, Vincent, 2006, “Les oeuvres de Śaṅkaranandana: nouvelles
ressources manuscrites, chronologie relative et identité
confessionnelle”, Annali dell’Università degli studi di Napoli
“L’Orientale”. Rivista del Dipartimento di Studi Asiatici e del
Dipartimento di Studi e Ricerche su Africa e Paesi Arabi, 66: 83-122.

Feuerstein, George, 1974, The Essence of Yoga: A Contribution to the
Psychohistory of Indian Civilization. Delhi.

Krasser, Helmut, 2001, “On the Date and Works of Śaṅkaranandana”. In
Raffaele Torella (ed.) Le Parole e i Marmi: Studi in Onore di Raniero
Gnoli nel suo 70° compleanno (Serie Orientale Roma 92), pp. 489-508.

Nemec, John, 2011, The Ubiquitous Śiva: Somānanda’s Śivadr̥ṣṭi and his
Tantric Intelocutors, AAR Religion in Translation, New York: Oxford
University Press.

Ratié, Isabelle, 2011, Le Soi et l’Autre. Identité, différence et
altérité dans la philosophie de la Pratyabhijñā, Jerusalem Studies in
Religion and Culture 13, Leiden: Brill.

Torella, Raffaele, 1992, “The Pratyabhijñā and the
Logical-Epistemological School of Buddhism”. In: Teun Goudriaan (ed.)
Ritual and Speculation in Early Tantrism: Studies in Honor of André
Padoux, Albany: SUNY Press, pp. 327-45.

———, 2002, The Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikā of Utpaladeva with the Author’s
Vr̥tti. Critical Edition and Annotated Translation, Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass (Ist edn. Serie Orientale Roma 71, IsMEO, Roma, 1994), repr.
2014.

———, 2004 “How is Verbal Signification Possible: understanding
Abhinavagupta’s Reply”, Journal of Indian Philosophy 32(2-3): 173-88.

———, 2007a, “Studies in Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti. Part I.
Anupalabdhi and apoha and in a Śaiva Garb”. In: Karin Preisendanz (ed.)
Expanding and Merging Horizons: Contributions to South Asian and
Cross-cultural Studies in Commemoration of Wilhelm Halbfass, Vienna, pp.
473-90.

———, 2007b, “Studies in Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti. Part II.
What is Memory”, In: Indica et Tibetica. Festschrift für Michael Hahn
zum 65. Geburtstag von Freunden und Schülern überreicht, herausgegeben
von Konrad Klaus und Jens-Uwe Hartmann, Wien, pp. 539-63.

———, 2007c,“Studies in Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti. Part III.
Can a Cognition become the Object of another Cognition?”. In: Dominic
Goodall, André Padoux (eds.) Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d’Hélène
Brunner, Pondichéry, pp. 475-84.

———, 2007d,“Studies in Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti. Part IV.
Light of the Subject-light of the Object”. In: Birgit Kellner et al.
(eds.) Pramāṇakīrtiḥ: Papers Dedicated to Ernst Steinkellner on the
Occasion of his 70th Birthday, Wiener Studien zur Tibetologie und
Buddhismuskunde, Heft 70.1-2, Wien, pp. 925-39.

———, 2009, “From an Adversary to the Main Ally: The Place of Bhartr̥hari
in the Kashmirian Śaivādvaita”. In: M. Chaturvedi (ed.) Bhartr̥hari:
Language, Thought and Reality, Delhi, pp. 343-54.

———, 2011, The Philosophical Traditions of India: An Appraisal,
Varanasi: Indica Books.

———, 2012, “Studies in Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti. Part V.
Self-awareness and Yogic Perception”. In: François Voegeli et al. (eds.)
Devadattīyam: Johannes Bronkhorst Felicitation Volume. Worlds of South
and Inner Asia 5, Berne: Peter Lang, pp. 275-300.

———, 2013a, Inherited Cognitions: Prasiddhi, Āgama, Pratibhā, Śabdana
(Bhartr̥hari, Utpaladeva, Abhinavagupta, Kumārila and Dharmakīrti in
Dialogue). In: Vincent Eltschinger and Helmut Krasser (eds.) Scriptural
Authority, Reason and Action: Proceedings of a Panel at the XIV World
Sanskrit Conference, Kyoto, September 1st-5th 2009, Wien:
Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften, Philosophisch-Historische
Klasse, Sitzungsberichte, 847. Band, Wien, pp. 455-480.

———, 2013b, “Pratyabhijñā and Philology”, Journal of the American
Oriental Society, 133(4): 705-13.

———, 2014a, “Utpaladeva’s Lost Vivr̥ti on the Īśvarapratya-bhijñākārikā”,
Journal of Indian Philosophy, 42: 115-26.

———, 2014b, “Notes on the Śivadr̥ṣṭi by Somānanda and its Commentary”,
Journal of Indian Philosophy, 43: 551-601.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Feuerstein 1974: 176-77. A very similar position is also maintained by
Mircea Eliade. For a detailed presentation of Pratyabhijñā philosophy,
cf. Torella 1992; 2002: ix-xlv; 2009; Ratié 2011.

2 A somewhat problematic book has recently been devoted to this
important work (Nemec 2011; on it, see a review article in Torella
2013b). A survey of the textual and translation problems of the
Śivadr̥ṣṭi can be found in Torella 2014b.

3 Vol. I, p. 2: śrīsomānandanāthasya vijñānapratibimbakam.

4 Just to give an example, we can see that when Mādhava describes the
Pratyabhijñā-Darśana in the Sarva-Darśana-Saṁgraha he presents passages
coming only from Abhinava’s Vimarśinī.

5 The main reference point for Utpaladeva is Dharmakīrti (then Dignāga
and Dharmottara). Abhinavagupta gives a prominent place also to
Śaṅkaranandana, a very interesting and peculiar post-Utpala thinker (see
Bühnemann 1980; Krasser 2001; Eltschinger 2006; Torella 2011: 19 n. 12).

6 Interestingly, though showing on all occasions to Bhartr̥hari the
highest respect and appreciation, Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta do not
accept the theory of sphoṭa, indeed one of the cardinal points of his
doctrine. The reasons for this denial are investigated in Torella 2004.

7 For an assessing of the correct text of the two ślokas and elaborate
explanation of their import, see Torella 2013a: 458-62.

2

Viṣam apy amr̥tāyate . . .

Paramādvaita in the Mystical Hymns

of the Śivastotrāvalī

Bettina Bäumer

Utpaladeva’s Śivastotrāvalī or collection of verses (muktaka) and hymns
(stotra) is one of the most outstanding documents of mystical
literature, not only in Sanskrit, but even in the context of mysticism
in any tradition. If Utpaladeva is the disciplined philosopher in his
Kārikās and Siddhis, in these verses he enjoys the freedom of
spontaneous expression of his most intimate experience and of his
intense longing to be one with his Lord. If his bhakti is defined by his
advaita, we could call the Stotrāvalī the laboratory of Recognition, a
laboratory in which he experiments with all the possible states of
separation, union and the ever-achieved state of non-duality
(satatodita). The experiences he expresses in the Stotrāvalī are the
precondition for his philosophy of Recognition:

kathaṁcid āsādya maheśvarasya dāsyam . . . — ĪPK I.1

The purposeful vagueness and understatement of kathaṁcid undergoes all
kinds of variations in the Stotrāvalī. The humility expressed in dāsyam
(“state of servanthood”) already shows the creative tension between
bhakti and advaita that is so characteristic of Utpaladeva. And, as
Torella has pointed out, it is not only the recognition of the Lord
which is “the cause of the achievement of all spiritual wealth”
(samastasaṁpatsamavāptihetu), but also the state of servanthood of the
Lord (according to Abhinavagupta’s Vimarśinī). The other aspect of
kathaṁcid pointing to the importance of grace is already expressed in
the Vr̥tti. All these aspects implied in the first kārikā will be fully
unfolded in the Stotrāvalī.

As mentioned by Kṣemarāja in his Vivr̥ti, the collection of verses and
the arrangement in twenty stotras is not the work of Utpaladeva but of
his disciples, Śrī Rāma, ādityarāja and Śrī Viśvāvartta, who provided
titles to the twenty stotras. He also mentions that only three hymns
have been composed by Utpala in the way they are handed down by
tradition: the Saṁgrahastotra, Jayastotra and Bhaktistotra (13, 14 and
15). Kṣemarāja mentions the same altruistic motif for their composition
in the first kārikā:

in order to bestow grace on those people who are eager to recognize
their own true nature (svaṁ rūpaṁ tathātvena parāmraṣṭum
arthijanānujighr̥kṣayā . . . , introductory part).

And he calls Utpaladevācārya one who “has always the direct realization
of the supreme Lord as his own Self” (satatasākṣātkr̥ta svātma
maheśvaraḥ).

If the verses or hymns are called stotras, most of them do not conform
to the traditional style of stotra,1 and if they do, they not only
praise the Lord, but, as in the very first verse of the entire text,
they also praise the bhaktas who have already achieved union with the
Lord and who do not need to practise meditation, japa, etc. (I.1). No
wonder, Kṣemarāja identifies their state with anupāya, the no-means, as
expounded in the Tantrāloka (II). A similar praise is expressed to the
devotees “who in every state worship you always as having assumed the
nature of all things — they indeed are my chosen deities”.2

But the intention of this paper is not the literary form of the
Stotrāvalī, nor a general survey, but an analysis of its content in
regard to the topic of the overcoming of dualities and opposites in the
light of the experience of paramādvaita. Instead of finding a
contradiction between bhakti and advaita, it is, in the words of
Torella,

the perspective of the paramādvaita, such an elevated viewpoint that it
does not fear what is different from itself, and where the “higher” does
not automatically cancel the “lower”. — ĪPK, Introduction, p. XXI

First I want to analyse a number of verses which describe opposites and
their overcoming in the mystical experience, belonging to different
contexts. We may start with a more philosophical verse:

sadasattvena bhāvānāṁ yuktā yā dvitayī gatiḥ ।

tām ullaṅghya tr̥tīyasmai namaś citrāya śambhave ।। — 2.1

There are two ways associated with existing things:

being and non-being.

I offer my homage to the wonderful Śambhu

who transcends them, being the third.3

Śiva is praised as being beyond the duality of real and unreal, and
hence as the “third” one, and he is wonderful on account of his
transcending the two states.

In the same stotra he comes down to the level of experience from this
philosophical statement, by calling the fire of Śiva cool:

paramāmr̥tasāndrāya śītalāya śivāgnaye ।

kasmaicid viśvasaṁploṣaviṣamāya namo'stu te ।। — 2.3

May you be glorified O Mild One,

smooth and brimming with the finest nectar,

O fire of Śiva4 the cool one

who burns away the entire universe.

In fact, the tone of this second stotra is one of the overcoming of
opposites:

samastalakṣaṇāyoga eva yasyopalakṣaṇam।

tasmai namo'stu devāya kasmaicid api śambhave ।। — 2.6

May the Lord be glorified,

the mysterious Śambhu

whose only definition is that he is

devoid of all definitions. — tr. Bailly

There is a whole series of praises to Śambhu as the coincidentia
oppositorum, which leads up to verse 12:

māyāvine viśuddhāya guhyāya prakaṭātmane ।

sūkṣmāya viśvarūpāya namaś citrāya śambhave ।।

Homage to the wondrous Śambhu,

the Deluding One

who is yet pure and clear;

the Hidden One

who has yet revealed himself;

the subtle One

whose form takes the form of the whole universe. — tr. Bailly

But there are two verses which express affirmation, negation and their
transcendence, in a kind of Nāgārjunian way. The first concerns the
antinomy between Vedas and Āgamas:

vedāgamaviruddhāya vedāgamavidhāyine ।

vedāgamasatattvāya guhyāya svāmine namaḥ ।। — 2.7

Homage to the Lord, the mysterious One,

who is opposed to the Vedas and Āgamas,

who is the revealer of the Vedas and Āgamas,

and who is the true essence of the Vedas and Āgamas.

This shows both, his transcendence of all scriptures as well as their
relativity in relation to their originator, as well as the relativity of
the opposition of different schools and traditions.

The same principle applies to the different schools of Tantrism:

dakṣiṇācārasārāya vāmācārābhilāṣiṇe ।

sarvācrāya śarvāya nirācārāya te namaḥ ।। — 2.19

Homage be to Śarva,

the essence of the right-handed path

the lover of the left-handed path,

who belongs to all ways of practice

and to none at all

(or: who transcends all traditions).

The following verse concerns the opposition between saṁsāra and its
transcendence:

saṁsāraikanimittāya saṁsāraikavirodhine ।

namaḥ saṁsārarūpāya niḥsaṁsārāya śambhave । — 2.8

Glory be to Śambhu

the sole cause of the world

and its only destroyer,

who has taken the form of the world

and who transcends the world.

Here the opposites are saṁsāra and niḥsaṁsāra (unworldliness), which are
elsewhere taken as saṁsāra and mokṣa. What is a statement of Śiva being
both opposites and transcending them is expressed as a process of
transformation in one of the key verses of Utpaladeva, describing the
mystical way of Śaṅkara:

duḥkhāny api sukhāyante viṣam apy amr̥tāyate ।

mokṣāyate ca saṁsāro yatra mārgaḥ sa śāṅkaraḥ।। — 20.12

Where even suffering is transformed into joy,

where even poison becomes nectar,

where the world itself is a way of liberation:

there is the way of Śiva

(or: this is the tradition of Śaivism).

The conscious use of denominatives (sukhāyante, amr̥tāyate, mokṣāyate)
provides stress to this powerful statement, a kind of summary of the
Śaiva path. Kṣemarāja paraphrases mārga significantly by: paraṁ śāktaṁ
padam (“the supreme state of Energyˮ) because it is Śakti who exercises
her transforming power. The contrast of poison and nectar (viṣa and
amr̥ta) is one of the powerful metaphors in the Stotrāvalī, having the
mythical background of the churning of the milk ocean. This is alluded
to in a moving verse of the Saṁgrahastotra:

kaṇṭhakoṇaviniviṣṭam īśa te

kālakūṭamapi me mahāmr̥tam ।

apy upāttam amr̥taṁ bhavadvapur

bhedavr̥tti yadi rocate na me ।। — 13.17

Even the deadly poison

that rests in a corner of your throat, (O Lord,)

is supreme nectar to me.

But even if I attain nectar,

I do not want it,

if it is separate from your body.

This verse contains one way of interpreting the phrase viṣam apy
amr̥tāyate, the poison being the one associated with the Lord and hence
transformed as well as transforming (pain into joy).

The ideal is not only transforming suffering into happiness, but
reaching a state of equality, equanimity or harmony (samatā) of both. It
is not achieved automatically but by an equalizing meditation. In a
powerful metaphor Utpaladeva compares this process to a devastating
flood:

harṣāṇām atha śokānāṁ sarveṣām plāvakaḥ samam ।

bhavad-dhyānāmr̥tāpūr nimnānimnabhuvām iva ।। — 3.9

Meditation on you full of nectar

makes all joys and sorrows equal

like a flood, levelling high and low lands.

It cannot be achieved by an ordinary meditation, but, as Kṣemarāja
emphasizes, by a state of absorption (samāveśa).

The ideal of samatā is expressed by another cosmic metaphor: equinox
(viṣuvat, sometimes abhijit):

bhaktānāṁ samatāsāraviṣuvatsamayaḥ sadā ।

tvadbhāvarasapīyūṣarasenaiṣāṁ sadārcanam ।। — 17.5

The time of the equinox,

whose essence is equanimity,

is celebrated by the devotees continuously;

for always does their worship consist

of the sweet bliss of your devotion. — tr. Bailly

And yet, equanimity does not mean absence of emotions, on the contrary.
Utpaladeva’s bhakti is charged with emotions, often contrasting ones. In
this respect he is completely in the tradition of Vijñāna-Bhairava,5
Spanda-Kārikā6 and his own guru, Somānanda.

The following verse contains a hint to some of the dhāraṇās of the
Vijñāna-Bhairava:

praharṣād vātha śokād vā yadi kuḍyādghaṭād api ।

bāhyād athāntarādbhāvāt prakaṭībhava me prabho ।। — 5.10

Whether in great joy or in sorrow,

from a wall or from an earthen pot,

whether from external things or internal states —

reveal yourself, O Lord!

It is interesting to note that Kṣemarāja does not refer here to the
Vijñāna-Bhairava7 to explain the wall and the earthen pot. He only
comments on vā as meaning kutaścit sphuṭībhava (“manifest yourself from
whereverˮ). The Stotrāvalī does not show many signs of a Tantric
spirituality, but in this verse the connection is clear. As in the
Vijñāna-Bhairava, the experience of the Divine can happen either from
external things or from inner states.

The true devotees are given to strong emotions:

rudanto vā hasanto vā tvām uccaiḥ pralapanty āmī ।

bhaktāḥ stutipadoccāropacārāḥ pr̥thag eva te ।। — 15.3

Whether weeping or laughing,

they address you in loud, delirious speech.

Uttering hymns of praise, the devoted

are truly unique attendants. — tr. Bailly

The devotee does not seek to avoid the emotions with a view to a state
of equanimity, on the contrary. In some of the most powerful verses
Utpaladeva prays for experiencing the extremes.

bhaktikṣīvo 'pi kupyeyaṁ bhavāyānuśayīya ca ।

tathā haseyaṁ rudyāṁ ca raṭeyaṁ ca śivety alam ।। — 16.7

Let me be enraged and yet

compassionate toward the world.

And thus in the madness of devotion

may I laugh and weep and chant

Śiva, thunderously. — tr. Bailly

Here the contrasting emotions are anger and compassion towards the
world. Utpaladeva throws to the winds even the ideal of equanimity
(samatā) and undistracted establishment in the Self (svastha).

viṣamastho 'pi svastho 'pi rudann api hasann api ।

gambhīro 'pi vicitto 'pi bhaveyaṁ bhaktitaḥ prabho ।। — 16.8

Out of Love, O Lord,

let me be disturbed and yet at peace,

weeping or laughing,

in deep thought or distracted.

These two verses embracing the opposites are in a way summarized in the
following:

bhaktānāṁ nāsti saṁvedyaṁ tvadantar yadi vā bahiḥ ।

ciddharmā yatra na bhavān nirvikalpaḥ sthitaḥ svayam।। — 16.9

For the devotees nothing else is to be known

within you or outside.

For you are of the essence of consciousness

established in your own thought-free state.

Here lies the justification for accepting all opposite states, because
each one shares in the pure Divine consciousness. Bhakti alone is the
condition for sharing in this all-inclusive and all-transcending
consciousness.8

Śambhu is praised as the very coincidentia oppositorum:

namaḥ satatabaddhāya nityanirmuktabhāgine ।

bandhamokṣavihīnāya kasmaicid api śambhave ।। — 2.17

Homage be to Śambhu, who is ever bound,

and who is eternally liberated,

who is neither bondage nor liberation,

because he is indescribable.

Utpaladeva loves expressions of inexpressibility or indescribability,
just like kathañcit and kasmaicit.

The greatest opposition exists between the material, inert (jaḍa) and
conscious reality (cit), corresponding also to subject and object
(vedaka, vedya). But in the Lord even this pair of opposites is
embraced:

jaḍe jagati cidrūpaḥ kila vedye 'pi vedakaḥ ।

vibhur mite ca yenāsi tena sarvottamo bhavān ।। — 3.20

In this unconscious world

you are the form of consciousness.

Among the knowable you are the knower.

Among the limited you are all-pervasive,

therefore you are the highest of all.

This verse might well sum up the position of paramādvaita as defined by
Torella at the beginning. It is therefore no wonder that for the
devotees who are intoxicated by their love for the Lord, he is both,
with form and formless, internal as well as external (16.22).

If the Lord is the union of opposites, his devotees can well realize him
in any opposite state:

dharmādharmātmanor antaḥ kriyāyor jñānayos tathā ।

sukhaduḥkhātmanor bhaktāḥ kimapy āsvādayanty aho ।। — 15.6

Between activity and knowledge,

whether righteous or unrighteous,

whether full of happiness or suffering,

O, the bhaktas taste something inexpressible.9

Of course, the expression āsvādayanti is in tune with the sensible
experience of the Lord, where Utpaladeva frequently uses the sense of
taste, mostly connected with amr̥ta, sudhā, piyūṣa, etc. It is this
sensible experience which embraces as well as transcends all opposites.

However, the mystic remains conscious of the contradictions experienced,
when he uses the term virodharasika (attachment for contradictory
objects), as in the following:

kva nu rāgādiṣu rāgaḥ kva ca haracaraṇāmbujeṣu rāgitvam ।

itthaṁ virodharasikaṁ bodhaya hitam amara me hr̥dayam ।। — 5.20

What comparison is there between attachment for sense-objects

and love for the lotus feet of Hara?

Thus, O Immortal One, make me aware of contradictory tastes

and awaken my heart to what is beneficial.10

Here it seems to be a matter of choice between two loves, but there is
also a way of accepting and transforming the pair of attachment and
aversion.

niveditam upādatsva rāgādi bhagavan mayā ।

ādāya cāmr̥tīkr̥tya bhuṅkṣva bhaktajanaiḥ samam ।। — 5.13

O Lord! accept my offerings of attachment and aversion!

Having received them and transformed them into immortal nectar,

enjoy them together with your devotees.

The metaphor of ritual offerings is here applied to the very disturbing
worldly emotions which are divinized (“nectarized” in the words of Swami
Lakshman Joo) and shared between the Lord and the devotees.

The overcoming of opposites in the realm of mystical experience is also
applied to time.

na tadā na sadā na caikadety api sā yatra na kāladhīr bhavet ।

tad idaṁ bhavadīyadarśanaṁ na ca nityaṁ na ca kathyate 'nyathā ।। — 12.5

Neither “then” nor “always”

nor even “once”.

Where no awareness of time exists

that is verily your realization.

It can neither be called “eternal”

nor in any other way (i.e. temporal).

By a kind of Nāgārjunian negation of negation, any temporal category is
excluded from the realm of mystical experience. This negation is so
forceful because religious language again and again lands in the
categories of time and eternity.

The richness of mystical experience contained in the verses quoted
cannot be brought into any systematic order, but every one can
ultimately be related to paramādvaita which includes as well as
transcends all opposites. Apart from expressions related to the nature
of the Divine as containing all opposites, it is the mystical process
that engages Utpaladeva. And in the final analysis, the greatest
opposition which needs to be overcome is that between the limited ego
and the Divine aham. Here, too, advaita is not the ending point but the
starting point.

nātha lokābhimānānām apūrvaṁ tvaṁ nibandhanam ।

mahābhimānaḥ karhi syāṁ tvadbhaktirasapūritaḥ ।। — 9.13

O Lord! You are the sole cause

of all worldly egos —

when shall I attain the great Ego

filled with the bliss of your Love?

The great abhimāna is nothing but the Divine I-consciousness without
which no individual ego could exist.

Utpaladeva also gives a grammatical justification to the pre-eminence of
the first person, the Divine “I”:

uttamapuruṣo 'nyo sti yuṣmaccheṣaviśeṣitaḥ ।

tvam mahāpuruṣas tv eko niḥśeṣapuruṣāśrayaḥ ।। — 3.14

The “first person”

is distinguished from the second person,

and from the “third person” as well.

You alone are the Great Person,

the refuge of all persons.

Kṣemarāja goes into the philosophical implications of this grammatical
statement.

Some striking verses relate to the process of transformation which does
involve the participation of the mystic.

yo 'vikalpam idam arthamaṇḍalam

paśyatīśa nikhilaṁ bhavadvapuḥ ।

svātmapakṣaparipūrite jagat

yasya nityasukhinaḥ kuto bhayam ।। — 13.16

He who perceives this whole universe of objects

in a thought-free state as your divine body,

and who fills the world with his own self —

he is ever blissful. Whence the fear?

The process implied is a state of nirvikalpa which alone makes it
possible to experience the world as divine, but in a second (or third)
step to identify one’s self with this universal vision of the divine
body. The result is of course a blissful state free from fear.
Indirectly this experience contains not only advaita (between the
universal divine and the individual), but the coming together of all
three constituents of trika: śiva, śakti, nara (śakti being the
universal expansion).

This verse expresses both an experience actually undergone by Utpaladeva
and a practice of identification of the individual with the universal
Self.

The most extraordinary expression of a mystical experience — an
experience of pratyabhijñā — as total identification with the Divine
aham is found in verse 5.15:

antarbhakti-camatkāra-carvaṇāmīlitekṣaṇaḥ ।

namo mahyaṁ śivāyeti pūjayan syāṁ tr̥ṇāny api ।।

With my eyes closed

relishing within the wonder of inner devotion,

May I worship even the blades of grass thus:

“Glory to Śiva, to myself”!

The mantra namaḥ śivāya is applied to the mystic himself, as well as to
the blades of grass in an ecstatic unity of all reality, the trika. The
description of the experience is based on the aesthetic enjoyment:
camatkāra, carvaṇā, transmuted into the inner devotion, as well as on
the metaphor of worship with mantra. The philosophical implication is
that there is no jaḍa, because even the blades of grass are suffused
with consciousness. In this verse several levels of Utpaladeva’s
mysticism come together: the aesthetic, the bhakti, but all centred on
the Divine “I”: namo mahyaṁ śivāya.

From the extraordinary richness of Utpaladeva’s mystical hymns we have
considered one central aspect which finds diverse expressions. The
Stotrāvalī can in many ways be related to the philosophy of
Pratyabhijñā, bathed in a spirit of bhakti, hence very different from
Abhinavagupta. But this comparison is not my task here. At the end I
only want to throw light on the texts quoted from an analysis of
mystical language.

I am referring to two theories on mystical language which can well be
applied to Utpaladeva. One question which arises while reading and
listening to the Śivastotrāvalī is this: if these verses were expressed
by the author in a state of mystical intoxication (which he often refers
to) why do they also contain a number of stereotypes, traditional images
and metaphors? First of all, the mystic cannot help but use language
which is also conventional (sāṅketika) and in a way unfit to the
language-transcending experience.

Pierre Hadot, great interpreter of Plotinus, has analysed mystical
language and come to the following conclusion:

It is said — and rightly so — that one should not be misled by the
language of the mystics. They, too, have their common places and their
traditional images, in a word, their rhetoric . . . but the authentic
experience gives a tone to the language which cannot deceive. . . .11

The rhetoric and common places in the case of Utpaladeva are drawn from
the world of ritual worship (pūjā, arcā), and from the devotion offered
to the guru or the deity by worshipping their lotus feet. All these
accepted traditional images need to be interpreted in the light of the
original experience. But, as Hadot says, the spontaneous experience
cannot be overheard, it passes through even the conventional language
(as in the case of the last quoted verse).

The mystic cannot help but use metaphors to express the inexpressible.
These metaphors are taken from the traditional background, but are
constantly in need to be transcended and made to explode. In another
approach of interpreting mystical language, the expert on German
mysticism (Meister Eckhart in particular), Alois Haas, has taken up an
expression coined by Hans Blumenberg, namely “explosive metaphors”.12
This concept is applied mostly to the negative theology and mysticism of
Dionysius Areopagite and other neo-Platonic mystics of the Christian
tradition, but it has universal implications. Mystical language being

a combination of the observable and more than observable. . . . By
allowing the metaphor to deconstruct itself through paradox (I would
add: and negation), it allows for the possibility of perceiving oneness
and eternity. . . . (And) In the final analysis all metaphors can be
regarded as having an explosive effect.

— art. cit., p. 142

The best illustration is a quotation from Meister Eckhart:

I have often said: The shell must break and whatever is inside must come
forth; for if you want to have the nut, you must first crack the shell.
In the same way: if you want to find nature revealed, you must first
crack all its parables, and the further you penetrate, the closer you
will get to true being. When the soul finds the One in which all is one,
then it remains in this single Oneness.13

Utpaladeva uses another “explosive metaphor” where it is a question of
breaking the shell:

rāgādimayabhavāṇḍaka-

luṭhitaṁ tvadbhaktibhāvanāmbikā tais taiḥ ।

āpyāyayatu rasair māṁ

pravr̥ddhapakṣo yathā bhavāmi khagaḥ ।। — 7.4

I toss within the egg of the world

Consisting of attachment (hatred, etc.).

May the Mother, contemplative Love,

Nourish me with sweet essence,

So that I grow into a bird

With strong wings.

This is one of the most powerful metaphors implying the breaking of the
shell of worldly emotions and bondages in order to attain the freedom of
liberation. The word used for “bird” (khaga), also implies the movement
in the unlimited space of Consciousness (kha, cf. khecarī, khecara). The
condition for hatching this egg is not only bhakti, but bhakti-bhāvanā
which fulfils the role of the mother bird. A complex and multi-layered
metaphor.

The theory of the “explosive metaphors” is precisely applicable in the
case of the way Utpaladeva deals with opposites, first of all the one
given as the motto of this lecture: poison and nectar. He makes the
language explode by negating them, transcending them, including and
accepting them, and in this way revealing the inner core, the heart, the
pure consciousness, the divine body (vapus), and landing in the state of
paramādvaita.

References

Ācārya Utpaladeva viracitā Śivastotrāvalī (mūlamātra), ed. Īśvarasvarūpa
Svāmī Lakshman Joo, Srinagar: Ishvar Ashram Trust, 1997.

Bailly, Constantina Rhodes, 1987, Shaiva Devotional Songs of Kashmir, a
tr. and study of Utpaladeva’s Śivastotrāvalī, Albany: SUNY Press.

The Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikā of Utpaladeva with the Author’s Vṛtti,
critically edited and translated by Raffaele Torella, Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass, 1st edn., 1994 (3rd edn., 2013).

Śivastotrāvalī of Utpaladeva: A Mystical Hymn of Kashmīr, Exposition by
Swami Lakshman Joo, New Delhi: D.K. Printworld, 2008.

Śivastotrāvalī of Utpaladeva, Sanskrit text with Introduction, English
tr. and Glossary, N.K. Kotru, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass,1985.

The Śivastotrāvalī of Utpaladevācārya, with the Sanskrit Commentary of
Kṣemarāja, ed. with Hindi commentary by Rājānaka Lakṣmaṇa Varanasi:
Chowkhambha Sanskrit Series Office, 1964 (2nd edn. 2008).

Spandakārikās: The Divine Creative Pulsation, tr. Jaideva Singh, Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass, 1st edn., 1980.

The Stanzas on Vibration: The Spandakārikā with Four Commentaries, tr.
Mark S.G. Dyczkowski, Varanasi: Dilip Kumar Publishers, 1st Indian edn.,
1994.

Vijñāna-Bhairava [VBh] with the Uddyota by Kṣemarāja up to verse 23 and
with the Vivr̥ti by Śivopādhyāya thereafter, ed. M.R. Shastri, KSTS VIII,
Bombay, 1918.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 The Stavacintāmaṇi of Bhaṭṭa Nārāyaṇa is more in conformity with the
hymnic style.

2 sarvadā sarvabhāveṣu yugapat-sarvarūpiṇam ।

tvām arcayanty aviśrāntaṁ ye mamaite ’dhidevatāḥ ।। — 17.3

3 A more free translation by Bailly: “Homage to the miraculous Śambhu,
who, transcending the two forms — the real and the unreal — of all that
exists, constitute the Third Form.” (p. 39)

4 Cf. śivāgnaye in 2.5.

5 E.g. VBh. v. 101.

6 SpKā 1.22.

7 VBh. 59-60.

8 Cf. also 16.10 and 11.

9 Bailly 1987: 85: “Your devotees, in the face of all this, enjoy the
bliss of your devotion.”

10 Translation combined with N.K. Kotru.

11 Pierre Hadot, Plotin ou la simplicité du regard, Paris (Gallimard)
1997, pp. 87-88 (tr. from the French).

12 “Sprengmetaphorik” in German. Cf. Alois Haas, 2005, “The Nothingness
of God and Its Explosive Metaphors”, in Void and Fullness in the
Buddhist, Hindu and Christian Traditions, ed. Bettina Bäumer and John
Dupuche, New Delhi: D.K. Printworld, pp. 121-43.

13 Meister Eckhart, 1993, Werke, ed. N. Largier, Frankfurt a.M., vol. 1,
p. 545, tr. in Haas, art. cit., p. 142.

3

Detonating or Defusing Desire

From Utpaladeva’s Ecstatic Aesthetics to Abhinavagupta’s Ecumenical Art
Theory*

Daniele Cuneo

The present paper tries to gauge the theoretical difference between
Utpaladeva’s and Abhinavagupta’s “aesthetic” speculations. However, I
will argue that only the postulation of a conceptual divide between
aesthetics proper, i.e. a discourse on sensory perception, and art
theory, i.e. a discourse on art per se, can plausibly account for the
ratio of the textual material under scrutiny. Such a speculative
differentiation will allow for a contrast between Utpaladeva’s ecstatic
aesthetics, a discourse on sensory perception recognized as the
preferential path to rapturous identification with the consciousness of
Śiva, and Abhinavagupta’s art theory, a discourse on art per se
acknowledged as a viable way to temporarily overcome the inherent
painfulness of everyday sensory perceptions. The premises that nourish
Abhinavagupta’s art theory, that somewhat differ from his and
Utpaladeva’s śaiva Weltanschauung, will be tentatively interpreted in
light of the hypothesis of an implicit ecumenical agenda. The two
different paths, here postulated and identified, might be idiomatically
epitomized by means of their respective attitude towards desire, namely,
their respective methods for its detonation and its defusal.

Getting Started

Another quite possible and less slogan-like title of the present essay
might have been “An Instance of the Progressive Differentiation of
Tradition”. The initial input for this kind of research can be traced
back to Raffaele Torella’s list of priorities to be set in the field of
study dedicated, specifically, to Utpaladeva, and, more generally, to
so-called nondual Kashmir Śaivism. In such a list, “the progressive
differentiation of tradition” stood out as one of the main and most
urgent concerns. In general terms, the underlying idea consists of an
assessment of the subtle, and less subtle, differences in the thought of
the various authors of this celebrated tradition. Scholars have so far
concentrated their efforts almost solely on the similarities and the
unitary purport, rather than differences and conceptual revolutions,
between the philosophical speculations of a wide range of authors such
as — to name only a few of the most important thinkers — Somānanda,
Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta, his disciple Kṣemarāja and his commentator
Jayaratha, and even the late twentieth-century master Swami Lakshman
Joo.

In particular, my present concern is focused on what has been loosely
called the aesthetic thought developed in the womb of so-called non-dual
Kashmir Śaivism. As is well known, Abhinavagupta (c. ce 950–1020),
Utpaladeva’s (c. ce 925-75) celebrated disciple’s disciple, is rightly
considered one of the greatest aesthetic theorists of the Sanskrit
cosmos. His two justly-renowned works, the Locana on Ānandavardhana’s
Dhvanyāloka (DhvĀ) and the Abhinavabhāratī (ABh) on Bharata’s
Nāṭyaśāstra (NŚ), have created and established the “mainstream of
Sanskrit Literary Theory” in the broadest possible sense.

In recent years, quite a number of articles and studies have been
published with regard to the link between Abhinavagupta’s aesthetic
theories — and I would say in particular, Abhinavagupta’s aesthetic
concepts, i.e. rasa, camatkāra, pratibhā, sphurattā and viśrānti — and
the broader framework of the philosophy of Pratyabhijñā of which he is
the great systematiser.1

As a relevant instance, we can quote Torella’s words on the concept of
camatkāra, a very common term denoting the aesthetic experience in
Abhinavagupta’s works, to be analysed as a sort of aesthetic coté of the
concept of vimarśa, the reflexive self-awareness that intrinsically
characterizes and is ultimately non-different from the absolute
consciousness, i.e. Śiva himself. Commenting on a translation from
Abhinavaguta’s Īśvarapratyabhijñāvivr̥tivimarśinī (vol. II, p. 177),
Torella (2002: 118, fn. 23) states:

“Camatkr̥ti means the act of a person savouring (bhuñjānasya), that is,
the bliss constituted by the full achievement of fruition”. Bhuñjāna,
[Abhinavagupta] explains later, is he who, engaged in savouring a taste
such as sweetness, etc., unlike a voracious glutton, lets the experience
rest on the cognizing subject, that is, makes the ‘subject’ part
predominate over the ‘object’ part. Camatkāra, in its highest form, is
therefore both the act of savouring and fullness, absolute independence,
consciousness devoid of obstacles (avighnā saṁvit), a savouring which is
in the final analysis a savouring of one’s own self and of one’s own
bliss, which eludes every screen or intermediation of the world of
objects [. . .]. The terms with which it is glossed or with which it is
closely related may be grouped according to its principal components:
cognition, bliss, wonder. The first group includes, for example, vimarśa
(pratyavamarśa, etc.), carvaṇā, āsvāda, rasanā, pratīti; the second
includes ānanda, nirvr̥ti, viśrānti, laya; the third vismaya, vikāsa.

Therefore, the idea of camatkāra conveys the sense of a
quasi-aesthetical and intrinsically pleasurable wonder that strikes and
embraces the individual subject as soon as he cognizes the limitless
dimension of his own pure and absolute consciousness.2

Along very similar lines, it is possible to trace the philosophical and
metaphysical pedigree of the other aesthetic notions Abhinavagupta
employs in his works on poetics and dramaturgy, from rasa and dhvani3 up
to pratibhā4 and viśrānti5 without neglecting, obviously, the very term
saṁvid.

Furthermore, some very important essays by Bettina Bäumer have recently6
focused on the aesthetic ideas and concepts especially in so far as they
are already clearly developed in Utpaladeva’s writings and in other
early texts of non-dual Kashmir Śaivism.

On the one hand, as already pointed out by Gnoli, Utpaladeva is to be
acknowledged as the first author, in the paramparā of Pratyabhijñā, who
used the term camatkāra or camatkr̥ti.7 On the other hand, as shown by
Bäumer (2008), Utpaladeva bases his Śivastotrāvalī (ŚSĀ)8 on an almost
explicit “aesthetics of devotion” according to which the unity with Śiva
as well as the possible paths that lead to the recognition of such a
union are better characterized and fleshed out as an act of pleasurable
savouring and appreciation, especially in so far as the divine himself
is appropriately identified with the concepts of “beauty” and
“delight”.9

A very telling example of such “aesthetics of devotion” is represented
by two beautiful verses of the Śivastotrāvalī (specifically, ŚSĀ
13.14-15). In the poetic translation of Bailly, they read:

That which bestows on all objects of beauty (subhāgārthavastu)

The property of giving wonder (camatkr̥ti) at the mere touch –

By that very principle do those endowed with

Unwavering devotion (bhakti)

Worship your form.

Being self-luminous

You cause everything to shine;

Delighting in your form

You fill the universe with delight;

Rocking with your own bliss (rasa)

You make the whole world dance with joy.10

Perspectival Change

Along the lines exposed so far, the previous title for the present essay
was meant to be something like “Claiming Utpaladeva’s Share in
Abhinavagupta’s Aesthetics”. This rested on the assumption — a quite
plausible assumption in itself — that many of Abhinavagupta’s
speculations on poetry, theatre and art, in general, are rooted in
Utpaladeva’s philosophical and mystical thought, especially as it is
shaped in his Śivastostrāvalī. From this perspective, contrarily to what
happens in his Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikā and in his Siddhitrayī,
Utpaladeva is the ardent devotee who seeks the divine in every aspect of
reality, rather than relying on the “arid tools” of logical reasoning.11

However, after further research, I came to realize what I have already
hinted at above, via the idea of “progressive differentiation of
tradition”; namely, that in such a philosophical non-dualism, an
absolute non-dualism, a paramādvaita as espoused in so-called Kashmir
Śaivism, the most difficult and the most important task for a researcher
is not to interweave and highlight the connections among the different
domains of thought and among the various meanings of key concepts
recurring in these various domains — because everything cannot but be
intrinsically interrelated to everything else, especially in the grand
systematization of Abhinavagupta — but instead to explore the
differences of theory and argumentation between them. I am not claiming
that the identification of the aforementioned web of intertwined and
entangled ideas is useless. Quite the contrary: I am just stating that
spotting the differences can be equally fruitful, and even more
challenging.

Therefore, for our present concern, for building the palace of the
current discourse, we have to erect, so to speak, two theoretical
pillars: on the one hand, the clear metaphysical background of
Abhinavagupta’s aesthetic writings, namely both the Locana and the
Abhinavabhāratī,12 where terms such as saṁvid and pratibhā play a
central role; and on the other hand, the existence of a full-fledged
aesthetic thought in Utpaladeva’s writings, where terms such as
camatkāra, or even alaukika rasa13 (“extraordinary aesthetic
experience”, in Gnoli’s translation) have clearly metaphysical and
philosophical bearings too.

Among the questions that remain to be solved are the following:

1. How wide are the divergences exhibited between Utpaladeva’s and
Abhinavagupta’s “aesthetic” thought?

2. Which sources of inspiration and direct influences shaped the ideas
of these two authors?

3. Why do the actual textual embodiments of their “aesthetic”
speculations differ significantly from one another: only scattered
though quite numerous clues found in the various works of Utpaladeva, on
the one hand, and two massive commentaries on the most important texts
on Alaṁkāraśāstra and Nāṭyaśāstra written by Abhinavagupta, on the
other?

4. What were the theoretical and/or practical reasons and purposes for
developing any kind of aesthetics at all?

In my opinion, the crux of the whole discourse is precisely the very
term “aesthetics”. Etymologically, the English word is related to the
Greek word αἴσθησις, meaning “sense perception”, or “feeling”.
Therefore, literally, aesthetics is the science of, or better, the
discourse on sense perception, in the broadest possible sense. Contrary
to its original and etymological meaning, the “new” connotation of this
term as “that branch of philosophy that deals with the nature of art,
taste and beauty” is indeed extremely recent. Precisely, it goes back to
Baumgarten’s dissertation, Meditationes philosophicae de nonnullis ad
poema pertinentibus (1735) and is used commonly only after Kant and,
especially, Hegel.

In this regard, my general contention is that, in order to better
understand the materials offered by non-dual Kashmir Śaivism, one needs
to keep these two domains of theoretical thinking separate.14 On the one
hand, we have aesthetics proper, i.e. “aesthetics in its etymological
sense”, a theoretical discourse on sense perception, its ontology, its
phenomenology, its teleology and its ethics as well. On the other hand,
we have “aesthetics in its modern sense”, what we might call, in a
simpler way, “art theory”, that is a theoretical discourse on art, its
essence, purpose, phenomenology, ethics and so forth. If we staunchly
keep in mind this distinction, the questions raised above might simply
dissolve into thin air.

In particular, my specific contention is that Utpaladeva’s stray remarks
on rasa, camatkāra, carvaṇā, beauty and related ideas develop an
“aesthetics proper”. More explicitly, they provide a vivid picture of a
complex theory concerning sense perception, and — specifically — its
soteriological significance, namely the possibly positive role that
senses and sense perceptions can play on the path towards the final
identification with the absolute consciousness of Śiva. On the other
hand, Abhinavagupta’s works on Alaṁkāraśāstra and Nāṭyaśāstra develop a
full-fledged and very sophisticated theory of art — completely absent in
Utpaladeva’s writings — which has only a marginal though very telling
bearing on metaphysical and soteriological issues.

Contrasting and Interpreting Two Piles of Evidence

In order to flesh out the sketch of the theoretical subdivision that has
been so far attempted, it is necessary to pile up some evidence from the
textual material of Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta.

As it is — broadly speaking — a well-known characteristic of the Tantric
universe, one might not need to glean any evidence from the incredibly
vast array of Tantric texts in order to draw attention to the importance
of the senses, the sense perceptions and the desire that always
saturates them.15

Nevertheless, in the individual case of Utpaladeva, further quotations
from the Śivastotrāvalī might serve the purpose at hand:

Threefold is this path of [sensory]16 cognitions,

[as it is qualified] by pleasure, pain and delusion.

O all-pervading Lord, this is, for the devotees,

the entire and only cause of your attainment.17

As shown in Bäumer’s recent article (2008) on aesthetics in Kashmir
Śaivism, the whole world — according to Utpaladeva — is suffused with
the beauty of Śiva, as the universe is nothing but his own cosmic form
(viśvarūpa). Śiva himself is, therefore, the source of everything
beautiful.

O Lord, as you are the wellspring

Of each and every beauty,

[all] that is merged within you is invaluable,

be it a gem or a blade of grass.18

Therefore, from the point of view of an advanced devotee who has
realized that everything is merged in the Lord, every sense object
becomes beautiful and, as soon as it is perceived, bestows the bliss of
the union with the divine. Consequently, Utpaladeva can rapturously
sing:

Is there any state where you do not reside?

Is there anything that is not your luminous body?19

Or, again, in a surge of ecstatic elation:

I roar, O! and I dance!

My desires are fulfilled!

Now that you, O Lord,

of extraordinary beauty,

have occurred to me!20

The beauty of the world, therefore, can be either the supreme source of
bondage — if we do not recognize its identity with the absolute —, or
the royal path to the realization of the crystalline purity of our
consciousness — if we do recognize Śiva as its actual source.

However, the most telling example of Utpaladeva’s conception on the role
of sense objects, and therefore, of his aesthetic theory (proper) is yet
another verse from the Śivastotrāvalī:

While incessantly drinking in through the senses

The heady wine of your worship

From the overflowing goblet of all objects,

Let madness overtake me.21

Clearly enough, the madness our author is talking about is the absolute
and totalizing feeling of thrilled union with the divine that is to be
attained precisely through a complete immersion in the passionate
enjoyment of the objects of senses. Another way of interpreting the
positive significance of the sensory fruitions is sketched in the
following verses of the Śivastotrāvalī:

May there be in me, as there is in common people,

a forceful craving for the objects [of the world],

O Lord, but may I view them as your own body,

in so far as my conceptual divisions have disappeared.22

Let my sense faculties, thrilled with delight,

Be attached to their respective objects.

But may there not be, oh Lord, even for an instant,

Any cruel loss of the joy (rasa) of non-differentiation with you.23

Moreover, to better understand the significance of any instance of
sensory enjoyment, one should not forget what the sense-organs really
are, i.e. Śiva’s own śaktis, his sense-goddesses.24 As Utpaladeva
himself almost patently states in another verse:

Homage to the terrifying host of your powers,

who offer you everything they enjoy

through fruitions of the objects

that are ultimately nothing but pleasure.25

In the whole Tantric corpus of revealed texts, it is easy to spot
numerous examples of practices that aim at multiplying and intensifying
the fruitions of sense objects in order to detonate, so to speak, the
component of desire that permeates them. My contention is that this very
detonation of desire in an ecstatic outburst of beatitude and freedom
represents also, so to say, the ultimate goal of Utpaladeva’s
“aesthetics of devotion”. The absolute sentiment of love-brimming
devotion towards the divine, embodied in the enjoyment of sensory
experience, becomes the blissful immersion in the absolute divine
consciousness itself. It represents, therefore, an actual practice of
enlightenment.

The best-known paradigmatic examples of these practices of complete
absorption in the sensory experiences and in the fulfilment of desire
are the 112 dhāraṇās for the attainment of liberation expounded in the
celebrated Vijñāna-Bhairava.26 Many of these means consist, in fact, in
various instances of an incredibly intense sensory experience. In
general terms, towards the end of the text, the Vijñāna-Bhairava reads:

Whenever the consciousness of the all-pervading Lord is revealed through
any of the sense-organs, since their nature is ultimately the same, the
plenitude of the self by dissolution into consciousness [itself is
obtained].27

Therefore, Utpaladeva’s ecstatic aesthetics — as I would tentatively
call it — represents a clear offshoot of the widespread positive
assessment, in Tantric traditions, of the role of desire-charged sense
experiences, especially of ravishingly intense and totalizing ones, in
the human search for enlightenment. Exactly in so far as the whole world
is nothing but the beautiful and playful manifestation of the absolute
consciousness, the sensory experience of such a world is nothing but the
main gate for the realization of our identity with this very world, and
therefore with the absolute itself.

One of the main concerns of Utpaladeva’s aesthetics is, thus, the
usefulness of the perception of beauty. But what kind of beauty? The
beauty of creation, namely the beauty of nature, a beauty that is a
direct mirroring, or even better, the very manifestation of the beauty
of the Lord. But what about the beauty in art, the significance of art,
especially in so far as it is different from nature, from the universe
we ordinarily perceive?

After a cursory survey of the literature of non-dual Kashmir Śaivism
prior to Abhinavagupta, including obviously Utpaladeva’s writings, one
can actually find several stray references to the arts. However, these
instances do not certainly imply a full-fledged speculation on art nor,
I would argue, are they indicative of “a concern for art in itself”.
Quite on the contrary, I would claim that they are employed as
suggestive metaphors or as simple instances of an “ordinary” or “common”
experience, possibly a very intense one.

Just to quote some examples, one might refer to the well-known
theatrical metaphor hinted at in the famous three aphorisms of the
Śivasūtra (3.9: nartaka ātmā “the self is the actor/dancer”, 3.10: raṅgo
’ntarātmā “the inner self is the stage” and 3.11: prekṣakāṇīndriyāṇi
“the senses are the spectators”). Unfortunately, all the commentaries on
the Śivasūtra are later than Utpaladeva and cannot therefore help us in
retrieving the interpretation he might have given to these passages.28
In any case, at this junction, Kṣemarāja quotes a verse from Bhaṭṭa
Nārāyaṇa’s Stavacintāmaṇi,29 a text that might well have been known to
Utpaladeva30 and might have established some of the main coordinates for
the understanding of the theatrical metaphor in his times.

This pivotal31 verse reads:

You have initiated the drama of the three worlds,

containing in its womb the seed of the numerous entities emitted [by
you].

Is there any other poet but you, O Destroyer [i.e. Śiva],

who might be capable of bringing it to its conclusion?32

An example of the second manner of employing artistic references that I
have postulated, i.e. as an instance of an ordinary experience, possibly
a very vivid one, can be found in verses 41 and 73 of the
Vijñāna-Bhairava, where the explicit reference is the enjoyment of
music. Such is the fame of these verses that their verbatim quotation is
useless and can be merely included in a footnote.33

These and other references, together with the much larger number of
occurrences found in the works of Abhinavagupta and the masters who
followed him,34 have been gathered, for instance, by Bäumer, in order to
prove the great importance that the aesthetic dimension plays, and has
always played, in the domain of non-dual Kashmir Śaivism.35 As should be
clear by now, I do agree with this claim, but only in so far as one
understands “aesthetics” in its etymological sense, namely as a
discourse on sense perception.

Conversely, an art theory proper, i.e. “aesthetics” in its contemporary
sense, did not see the light before the ground-breaking works of
Abhinavagupta.36 In other words, before him, any reference to the arts
in the textual corpus under scrutiny was simply a metaphor,37 a powerful
metaphor indeed, for the creativity and the freedom of the absolute
consciousness or a simple example of any sensory experience whatsoever.

First, in his Locana on Ānandavardhana’s Dhvanyāloka and then, to an
even broader extent, in his Abhinavabhāratī on Bharata’s Nāṭyaśāstra,
Abhinavagupta develops an unprecedented and very sophisticated theory of
art. As I have also argued in my unpublished doctoral dissertation,38
the greatest achievement, the veritable paradigm shift, embodied in
Abhinavagupta’s art theory consists in the identification of “art” as a
specific separate domain of theoretical investigation. In particular,
Abhinavagupta’s implicit recognition of the apartness of “art” and of
“the fictional world created by it” is made explicit by the unambiguous
acknowledgement of a complete difference of plane between the
experiences determined by the “real world” and those triggered by the
appreciation of “an artistically created universe”.

In brief, the ordinary (laukika, as Abhinavagupta says) response to
everyday sensory perceptions brought about by the contact with the
common world of sense objects is almost inextricably entangled with the
inescapable concern for our well-being. Namely, any perception triggers
an emotional response mainly consisting in the cognition of the
possibility that the environmental situation might alter our welfare.
Consequently — unless we recognize the situation as indifferent to it,
in which case no emotion at all is aroused — the emotional response,
imbued by the structural desire to acquire pleasure and to avert
suffering,39 necessarily prompts us to act in order to remove an (even
hypothetical) state of pain or to prolong an (even hypothetical) state
of pleasure.40

Contrarily, the “aesthetic” response triggered by the perception of an
artistically created universe — a response that is to be recognized as
rasa in Abhinavagupta’s reinterpretation of the term — consists in a
special kind of emotion (alaukika or lokottara,41 as he says),
fundamentally devoid of any feeling of attachment or aversion, and
therefore consisting in the pure appreciation of emotionality in itself.
Abhinavagupta explains this peculiar capacity of art to evoke such a
desireless, and hence intrinsically beatific emotional response, by
borrowing the crucial idea of sādhāraṇīkaraṇa (generalization), from
Bhaṭṭa Nāyaka, one of his predecessors in the analysis of the concept of
rasa. To quickly illustrate his point: the emotions experienced while
enjoying an art work are “generalized”, in so far as they become
“deprived of any spatial or temporal qualifications, as well as
non-belonging to any specific individual”.42 Such a state of
generalization depends on a sort of clash between cognitive stances. The
enjoyers of any artistically created situation, though perfectly aware
of the fictional nature of the represented events, cannot avoid trusting
the clear, straightforward data of their direct perception.43 In
Abhinavagupta’s own words, the generalization occurs “on the basis of a
complete suppression of limiting causes such as time, space, subject and
so forth — those really existent as well as those evoked by poetry — as
a result of their reciprocal opposition”.44 Therefore, the artistic
universe is perceived as simultaneously real and non-real, so to speak.
For this very reason, i.e. for the inherent impossibility of a too
“concerned” involvement, it can indeed become the object of our
unconditioned delight.

As this topic has been extensively treated elsewhere by the present
author,45 it is time to go back to our central concern and try to answer
the questions raised above and, implicitly, to test our initial
hypothesis against the adduced evidence.

With regard to our question number 1, the one concerning the actual
divergence between Utpaladeva’s and Abhinavagupta’s aesthetic ideas, I
think it is safe to assume now that Utpaladeva’s “aesthetics proper”,
i.e. Utpaladeva’s theory of perception, is quite different from
Abhinavagupta’s “aesthetics in the contemporary sense”, i.e. from
Abhinavagupta’s art theory. On the one hand, we find Utpaladeva’s very
positive evaluation of a complete, totalizing, ecstatic immersion in the
whirlpool of sense experiences permeated, as they are, by unquenchable
desire, possibly by progressively redirecting them towards the active
union with the absolute through the very door of the ordinary
perceptions themselves. On the other hand, we find Abhinavagupta’s
analysis of art as the trigger for an intrinsically extramundane and
beatific experience, this being possible only in so far as the peculiar
ontological status of the artistic universe — contemporaneously real and
non-real — determines the temporary suppression of the element of desire
that haunts the ordinary sensory experience and dooms it to nothing but
an endless succession of unsatisfactory and unsatisfied cravings.

A very important point has gone unmentioned so far. We have already seen
how, in his speculations on art, Abhinavagupta sheds, so to speak, the
robes of the Tantric master and advocates a path to the beatific
savouring of one’s own consciousness that is radically different from
the one indicated by such texts as the Vijñāna-Bhairava, i.e. the total
absorption in increasingly more forceful fruitions of sensory objects,
immersed in the whirling eddy of desire. None the less, the Locana and
the Abhinavabhāratī represent only a small part of Abhinavagupta’s
writings. In all his more “sectarian” writings — if I am allowed the
unfair expression — he follows and develops the speculations of his
paramaguru Utpaladeva, and of the revealed tradition they equally share,
in recognizing both the metaphysical and the soteriological centrality
of sensory perceptions, and of the desire that enlivens them. His
attitude towards sense objects and desire can be illustrated, for
instance, by two famous stanzas of his Mālinīślokavārttika, a versified
commentary on the Mālinīvijayottara-Tantra:

That which is in desire, in the centre of desire, or opened by the hook
of desire, one shall obtain by desire. Willingly (kāmam) one shall unite
desires with desires.

Desire is the wish to appropriate. With [desire] as a cover, the
desirous attains everything, because desire is the ultimate principle of
this [whole universe].46

One might actually multiply ad libitum the quotations in this respect,
as this is indeed Abhinavagupta’s standard view regarding sensory
experience and desire. Therefore, one should ask why he maintains a
different position in his works dedicated to art by implicitly espousing
the “orthodox” view of “mainstream Brāhmanical thinking”47 — if you
allow me this provisional generalization — namely the view that condemns
and demonizes the desire-loaded sensory experience as the very shackle
that fetters us to suffering and transmigration.48 This crucial issue
will be tentatively met in answering our fourth question, namely the
practical and theoretical reasons for the differences between Utpala and
Abhinava with regard to “aesthetics”. However, answers to questions two
and three are presently due first.

With regard to our question number 2, the one concerning the sources of
inspiration and the direct influences on what we can now call
Utpaladeva’s “aesthetics” and Abhinavagupta’s “art theory”, we have
already given a provisional and, in my opinion, quite plausible
response. On the one hand, Utpaladeva’s ecstatic aesthetics is part and
parcel of his larger philosophy, based on the revealed śaiva texts
hinging on the recognition of the absolute unity of all experience and
reality in the perfect totality that is the supreme consciousness of
Śiva. On the other, Abhinavagupta’s art theory is deeply rooted in the
speculations of the authors that preceded him in commenting on the
Nāṭyaśāstra and in trying to formulate a theoretical discourse that
could account for the specific experience one has while enjoying a work
of art. Furthermore, as it is widely acknowledged, Abhinavagupta’s
aesthetics does also maintain a strong śaiva tinge; it could not be
otherwise, but more on that later on.

With regard to our question number 3, the one concerning the reasons for
the significant difference in bulk and organization between Utpala’s and
Abhinava’s speculation on “aesthetics”, one has to admit that a thorny
issue did dissolve into thin air, as promised, by means of the
differentiation between “aesthetics” and “art theory” I have proposed.
Since Utpaladeva did not consider aesthetics as a separate domain, it is
quite obvious that he did not dedicate a specific work to this topic but
simply discussed the utmost significance of sensory experiences in
different passages of his works. On the contrary, Abhinavagupta could
not but dedicate specific treatises to the issue of art, especially in
so far as he did want to establish the experience of art as a sui
generis experience and even resorted to a somewhat different theoretical
background in order to account for its internal logic.

Finally, let us try to respond to our question number 4, the one
regarding the teleological ratio in Utpala’s and Abhinava’s theories
underlying the very reason and purpose for developing their theories.
Questions about purposes are often the most difficult to deal with, and
— at least in Abhinava’s more complex case — I cannot claim that my
proposals are more than tentative hypotheses.

As we have already hinted at before, Utpaladeva’s discourse on
perception is a necessary component of his broader philosophy, therefore
its existence is somehow self-justified. However, with regard to
Abhinavagupta, one might sensibly ask: Why did Abhinavagupta need to, or
at least, why did he choose to conceive an unprecedented theory of art
and, in addition, one that requires a theoretical framework that seems
partly divergent from his śaiva Weltanschauung?

As the spoiler-like subtitle of my paper has already proclaimed, my
tentative response is that Abhinavagupta’s aesthetics is consciously
devised as an ecumenical endeavour. In other words, he moves even
further along the path traced by his paramaguru Utpaladeva, an attitude
clearly described in a section of the blurb of the conference from which
the present proceedings stem:

The main aim of the Pratyabhijñā philosophers was to cause the Tantric
Śaiva sects to emerge from the dimension of restricted circles, often
devoted to transgressive practices, and establish themselves in the
stratum of social normality, by internalizing, or in any case
circumscribing, their own specific differences. Their addressees are not
the ascetics, but, typically, the householders.49

Abhinavagupta conquers, so to speak, another intellectual field,
constituted by both Nāṭyaśāstra and Alaṁkāraśāstra — two knowledge
systems he intended to accommodate and unify by colonizing them with his
speculative might, although this operation necessarily required a
watering-down of his extreme, often antinomic paramādvaita.

This might be the reason for the aforementioned, somewhat paradoxical
situation in Abhinavagupta’s works on art: the simultaneous presence of
concepts and speculations that do have a strong Tantric śaiva tinge
along with ideas and perspectives that clearly do not fit in a Tantric
śaiva world-view. On the basis of the ecumenical agenda that I propose
he had in mind, we might see the former aspect of Abhinavagupta’s
writings as the possible result of an active enterprise of colonization,
and the latter as a necessary backward step, i.e. the self-aware choice
of downplaying, or simply remaining silent about, the most extreme
features of his Tantric legacy — in particular the aspects of his
thought that could have been charged with the accusation of antinomism
(say, the centrality of “extreme sensory experience” and “desire”). Such
watering-down consists, therefore, in the partial — temporary, we might
say — acceptance of a frame of reference that might be considered
amenable to an audience larger than the comparatively small śaiva
community.

Buttressing the Paradox

As a sort of corollary and backstage to the current discourse, it is
important to present some evidence that might buttress the simultaneous
presence of contradictory features in Abhinavagupta’s works on art
theory, features that as yet have been only stated but not really
investigated, especially in so far as the non-śaiva ecumenical attitude
is concerned.

With regard to the well-known and often reiterated overtly śaiva
features, one might just mention the use of many “charged” terms such as
the already mentioned pratibhā, camatkāra, saṁvid and viśrānti, then —
more specifically — the designation of the aesthetic experience with
terms that elsewhere label the blissful unity with Śiva;50 the
parallelism between the experience of art and the experience of the
absolute;51 the introductory and concluding verses of the chapters of
both the Dhvanyāloka-Locana and the Abhinavabhāratī that unequivocally
refer to śaiva doctrinal and philosophical notions,52 and many more
items that one might add to this short and cursory list.53

On the other hand, the main feature that is indicative of Abhinava’s
ecumenical attitude is the very account of the nature of rasa that we
have sketchily illustrated earlier. This account necessarily entails an
implicit and, at least, partial acceptance of a demonization and
marginalization of sensory experience and desire. Such a theoretical
stance cannot but be in radical opposition to the śaiva valorization of
desire as a crucial element in both ontology and soteriology, a
valorization that Abhinavagupta clearly supports in his other works.54
Another possible hint at such an attitude is the choice of the term
ātman to identify the real essence of the individual, instead of using
the word aham, a term he prefers in his Tantric and philosophical works,
as it better expresses the intrinsically dynamic nature of
consciousness.55 Furthermore, as inherently cautious argumenta e
silentio, one can mention the absence of extremely “loaded” terms such
as pratyabhijñā or vimarśa, and — even more remarkably — the absence of
quotations from any śaiva scripture whatsoever. On the contrary, the
many quotations that buttress his arguments on issues of aesthetics (in
the sense of “art theory”) come mainly from very well-known “mainstream”
sources such as the Yoga-Sūtra, the Sāṁkhya-Kārikā, the Nyāya-Sūtra or
the Mānava-Dharmaśāstra. Furthermore, I argue that the mere choice of
writing about issues regarding literature, and the arts in general,
already entails an inbuilt ecumenical attitude, “because — as Bhoja
states in his Śr̥ṅgāra-Prakāśa, p. 398, ll.10-11 — literature is
thoroughly non-sectarian (sāhityasya sarvapārṣadatvāt)”.

What might be regarded as a direct proof of such an ecumenical approach
is the presence of some passages in both the Locana and the
Abhinavabhāratī, in which Abhinavagupta argues for the validity of his
interpretations on aesthetic issues even from the viewpoint of different
philosophical or doctrinal positions — and therefore, so to say, even
independently of their actual tenets. Equally important in support of
this view is the presence of some similar passages in which
Abhinavagupta refrains from indulging in the analysis of different
philosophical positions, in so far as they are considered irrelevant to
the aesthetic issues at stake. One might quote in extenso a significant
passage of the Abhinavabhāratī, where, after giving his interpretation
of a verse, Abhinavagupta adds:

Furthermore, in this regard, one could look at Vijñānavāda,56
dvidhābhidhāna,57 sphoṭatattva,58 Satkāryavāda,59 ekatvadarśana,60 etc.
However, we have not been taught to resort to the void exertion of
weighing up bits of knowledge that would prove useless for the subject
at issue. Hence, enough with it.61

Notwithstanding the possible — or impossible — identification of the
various schools hinted at here,62 the purport of this passage clearly
lies in the idea that the analysis of rasa — or, at least, of the point
under discussion here — can be considered valid according to all the
different ways of interpreting reality, i.e. according to all traditions
of thought.63 Another passage that possibly harbours a similar implicit
rationale is Abh ad NŚ 6.15-16, vol. 1, p. 266 where the relation
between the main, great rasa and the various — implicitly secondary —
rasas is compared to the relation between word-meaning and
sentence-meaning according to the various theories of linguistic
signification usually upheld in classical Indian philosophy:

Furthermore, because of such a great rasa that is the principal one, the
other rasas — seen in interpenetration with the [respective] Stable
States — can be described as unreal, as in the doctrine of sphoṭa; as
real in that they have the nature of instruments, as in the doctrine of
anvitābhidhāna; or [as real] in that they have the nature of parts of
that whole [which is the great rasa], as in the doctrine of
abhihitānvaya (tataś ca mukhyabhūtāt mahārasāt sphoṭadr̥śīvāsatyāni vā,
anvitābhidhānadr̥śīvopāyātmakāni satyāni vā, abhihitānvayadr̥śīva
tatsamudāyirūpāṇi64 vā, rasāntarāṇi bhāvābhiniveśadr̥ṣṭāni rūpyante).65

Again, beyond the implicit technicalities of the various theories evoked
by Abhinavagupta,66 the main point of the passage seems again to justify
the “inter-disciplinary” validity of his interpretation of rasa-related
issues.

Therefore, if it is appropriate to generalize the purport of these and
similar passages, this sort of almost blatant statements concerning the
cross-philosophical (or, one might say, cross-sectarian) validity of
Abhinavagupta’s aesthetics amounts to the very statement of the autonomy
of the aesthetical discourse proper, at least in my understanding of the
issue.

To conclude the list of the pieces of evidence regarding Abhinavagupta’s
ecumenical stance in aesthetic matters, one might quote the “indirect”
evidence that is the very success of his theories that won general
acceptance, at least in their main features, among many later authors of
Nāṭyaśāstra and Alaṁkāraśāstra, regardless of their varied
philosophical-cum-religious affiliation.67

To put it otherwise, my contention is that, if one were to read
Abhinavagupta’s Dhvanyāloka-Locana and his Abhinavabhāratī without
knowing anything about Abhinavagupta as a Tantric master and as the main
exponent of a complex monistic philosophy based on an idea of the
absolute as an intrinsically dynamic and desire-ridden reality, one
could not recognize him as such. One could only surmise his Tantric
śaiva affiliation from the evidence gathered from the introductory and
the final verses that frame all the chapters of his works. One might
certainly not look for a strictly śaiva rationale of his aesthetic
issues, as nothing would point to this kind of interpretation (although
nothing would parade against it either).

However, to really conclude this digressional section, one should admit
that the hermeneutical proposal of an ecumenical attitude in
Abhinavagupta’s works on aesthetics is, for the time being, highly
tentative and intrinsically provisional. Its validity can be definitely
ascertained only by means of a complete scrutiny of the Abhinavabhāratī
and the Dhvanyāloka-Locana, a thorough investigation of Abhinavagupta’s
philosophical and Tantric works, and a non-cursory analysis of the many
authors who accepted and developed the main tenets of Abhinavagupta’s
Rasa Theory.

Concluding Remarks

Dousing or fanning the fire of desire?

To go back to the main issue of the present endeavour and sum up my main
thesis, it should now be apparent that the thinkers of Kashmir treated
so far explicitly recognized the centrality of desire and sensory
perceptions in the human experience of reality and dealt with their
overwhelming presence and force by dint of two different paths: the
“defusing desire” strategy and the “detonating desire” strategy. On the
one hand, the approach of “defusing desire” is pursued by Abhinavagupta
in his works on art theory, as he was implicitly following the lead of
what has been conditionally called the “mainstream” approach of
classical Indian thought to the issue of desire, i.e. its demonization,
especially with regard to any progress on the soteriological path. This
was, in my interpretation, a conscious choice, in so far as such a
strategic, ecumenical move would have let him reach the widest possible
audience and establish his aesthetic theories as “non-sectarian” and
hence “universally” appealing. On the other hand, the approach of
“detonating desire” is preferred in both Utpaladeva’s writings and
Abhinavagupta’s other works, those not focused on the experience of art,
in accordance with the main tenets of their Tantric tradition, in which
the tremendous and all-encompassing power of sensory experiences and
desire is ridden as an untamed stallion in an ever increasingly wilder
and more frenzied journey of enjoyments and sensory fruitions, up to the
very detonation of experience that is the final release and
identification with the supreme consciousness of Śiva.

* I am deeply grateful to Raffaele Torella, Vincenzo Vergiani, Elisa
Ganser, Elisa Freschi and Alessandro Graheli for their precious remarks
and suggestions. Any mistakes, of course, are mine alone.

Bibliographical References

Primary Literature

Abhinavagupta, 1918-38, Tantrāloka with Commentary by Rājānaka
Jayaratha, ed. M.K. Shastri, Allahabad/Srinagar/Bombay: Kashmir Series
of Texts and Studies XXIII, XXVIII, XXX, XXXVI, XXXV, XXIX, XLI, XLVII,
LIX, LII, LVII, LVIII.

———, 1921, Mālinīvijayavārttika, ed. Madhusudan Kaul Shastri, Srinagar:
Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies XXXII.

———, 1938-43, Īśvarapratyabhijñāvivr̥tivimarśinī, ed. Madhusudan Kaul
Shastri, Bombay: Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies, I-III.

———, 1940, Dhvanyāloka-Locana, ed. Paṭṭābhirāma Śāstrī, Benares: Kashi
Sanskrit Series 135.

———, 1985, Gītārthasaṁgraha, ed. S. Sankaranarayanan, Tirupati: Oriental
Research Institute.

———, 1998, Abhinavabhāratī, ed. R.S. Nagar, Delhi: Parimal Publications,
4 vols.

Ānandavardhana, 1940, Dhvanyāloka, ed. Paṭṭābhirāma Śāstrī, Benares:
Kashi Sanskrit Series 135.

Bhāmaha, 1970, Kāvyālaṁkāra, ed. and tr. P.V. Naganatha Sastry, Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass.

Bhaṭṭa Nārāyaṇa, 1918, Stava-Chintāmaṇi, with Commentary by Kṣemarāja,
ed. with notes by Mukunda Rama Shastri, Srinagar: Kashmir Series of
Texts and Studies X.

Bharata, 1998, Nāṭyaśāstra, ed. R.S. Nagar, Delhi: Parimal Publications,
4 vols.

Daṇḍin, 1938, Kāvyādarśa, ed. Pt. Rangacharya Raddi Shastri, Poona:
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute.

Kṣemarāja, 1911, Śivasūtravimarśinī, ed. J.C. Chatterji, Srinagar:
Kashmitr Series of Texts and Studies I.

Somānanda, 1934, Śivadr̥ṣṭi, with Utpaladeva’s Vr̥tti, ed. Madhusudhan
Kaul Shastri, Srinagar: Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies LIV.

Udbhaṭa, 1925, Kāvyālaṁkārasārasaṁgraha, with the Laghuvr̥tti of
Pratīhārendurāja, ed. Narayana Daso Banhatti, Poona: Bombay Sanskrit and
Prakrit Series.

Utpaladeva, 2000, Śivastrotrāvalī, with the Commentary of Kṣemarāja, ed.
with Hindi commentary by Swami Lakshmana Joo, Jammu/ Srinagar/New Delhi:
Ishwar Ashram Trust.

Vāmanadatta, Svabodhodayamañjarī (see Torella 2000).

Vijñānabhairava, ed. Mukunda Rama Shastri, Bombay: Kashmir Series of
Texts and Studies VIII, 1918.

Secondary Literature

Aiyar, K.A., 1939, “Pratibhā as the Meaning of a Sentence”, in
Proceedings and Transactions of the Tenth All-India Oriental Conference,
Tirupati, pp. 326-32.

Amaladass, A., 1984, Philosophical Implications of Dhvani: Experience of
Symbol Language in Indian Aesthetics, Vienna: De Nobili Research
Library.

Bailly, C. Rhodes, 1987, Shaiva Devotional Songs of Kashmir. A
Translation and Study of Utpaladeva’s Shivastotravali, Delhi: Sri
Satguru Publications.

Bansat-Boudon, L., 1992, Poétique du théâtre indien. Lectures du
Nāṭyaśāstra, Paris: Publication de l’Ecole Française d’Extrême Orient.

Bäumer, B., 1997, “Aesthetics of Mysticism or Mysticism of Aesthetics?:
The Approach of Kashmir Śaivism”, in B. Bäumer (ed.) Mysticism in
Shaivism and Christianity, Delhi: Abhishiktananda Society.

———, 2003a, Vijñāna-Bhairava: Das Göttliche Bewusstsein, Grafing:
Edition Adyar.

———, 2003b, “Beauty as Ānandaśakti in Kashmir Saivism”, in Saundarya:
The Perception and Practice of Beauty in India, ed. H.V. Paranjape, New
Delhi: Samvad India Foundation.

———, 2008, “Light and Reflection: The Metaphysical Background of
Aesthetics in Kaśmīr Śaivism”, in Vatsyayan and Chattopadhyaya, (eds.),
2008: 127-47.

Bhattacarya, K., 1972, “Śāntarasa et Advaita”, Journal Asiatique, 160:
89-105.

Bhattacharya, S.P., 1976, Śānta Rasa and Its Scope in Literature,
Calcutta: Sanskrit College.

Biardeau, M., 1995, L’Hinduisme. Anthropologie d’une Civilisation,
Paris: Flammarion.

Bilimoria, P. and A. Wenta, eds., 2015, Emotions in Indian
Thought-Systems, Routledge.

Boccali, G. and R. Torella, eds., 2007, Passioni d’Oriente. Eros ed
emozioni in India e Tibet, Torino: Einaudi.

Bonnet R., 1989, Shivastotravali. Les Hymnes de Louange a Shiva, Paris:
Maisonneuve.

Brodbeck, S., 2010, “Review of Christopher G. Framarin, Desire and
Motivation in Indian Philosophy, 2009”, Religious Studies, 46: 135-40.

Bronner, Y., 2012, “A Question of Priority: Revisiting the
Bhāmaha–Daṇḍin Debate”, Journal of Indian Philosophy, 40(1): 67-118.

Cahill, T., 2004, An Annotated Bibliography of the Alaṁkāraśāstra,
Varanasi: Indica Books.

Chakrabarti, A., 2005, “The Repose of the Heart: A Phenomenological
Analysis of the Concept of Viśrānti”, in Das and Furlinger 2005: 27-36.

Christie, E., 1979, “Indian Philosophers on Poetic Imagination
(Pratibhā)”, Journal of Indian Philosophy, 7: 153-207.

Cuneo, D., 2007, “The Emotional Sphere in the Light of the
Abhinavabhāratī”, Rivista di Studi Orientali, 80: 21-39 (published in
2009).

———, 2008-09, “Emotions without Desire: An Interpretive Appraisal of
Abhinavagupta’s Rasa Theory. Annotated Translation of the First, Sixth
and Seventh Chapters of Abhinavagupta’s Abhinavabhāratī”, unpublished
Ph.D. thesis, ‘Sapienza’ University of Rome.

———, 2013, “Unfuzzying the Fuzzy: The Distinction Between Rasas and
Bhāvas in Abhinavagupta and Bharata”, in Puṣpikā: Tracing Ancient India
Through Texts and Traditions — Contributions to Current Research in
Indology, vol. I, ed. Nina Mirnig, Péter-Dániel Szántó and Michael
Williams, Oxford: Oxbow Books.

Das, S. and E. Furlinger, eds., 2005, Sāmarasya: Studies in Indian Arts,
Philosophy and Interreligious Dialogue, New Delhi: D.K. Printworld.

De, S.K., 1959a, Some Problems of Sanskrit Poetics, Calcutta: Firma K.L.
Mukhopadhyay.

———, 1959b, “The Śānta Rasa in the Nāṭya-Śāstra and the Daśa-Rūpaka”, in
De, 1959a: 139-43.

Deutsch, E. and R. Bontekoe, eds., 1977, A Companion to World
Philosophies, Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers.

Fernández, R., 2001, “The Play of Freedom: An Aesthetic Approach to
Kashmir Śaivism”, in Marchianò and Milani, 2001: 125-34.

Framarin, C.G., 2009, Desire and Motivation in Indian Philosophy,
London: Routledge.

Fürlinger, E., 2009, The Touch of Śakti: A Study in Non-Dualistic Trika
Śaivism of Kashmir, New Delhi: D.K. Printworld.

Gerow, E., 1977, Indian Aesthetics: A Philosophical Survey, in Deutsch
and Bontekoe (eds.), pp. 304-23.

———, 1994, “Abhinavagupta’s Aesthetics as a Speculative Paradigm”,
Journal of American Oriental Society, 114: 186-208.

Gerow, E. and A. Aklujkar, 1972, “On Śānta Rasa in Sanskrit Poetics”,
Journal of the American Oriental Society, 92: 80-87.

Gnoli, R., 1968, The Aesthetic Experience according to Abhinavagupta,
Varanasi: Chowkamba Sanskrit Studies, 72, 2nd edn.

———, 1985, Il Commento di Abhinavagupta alla Parātriṁśikā
(Parātriṁśikātattvavivaraṇa), traduzione e testo, Roma: Istituto
italiano per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente.

———, 1999, Abhinavagupta. Luce dei Tantra, Milano: Adelphi.

Gonda, J., 1963, The Vision of the Vedic Poets, The Hague: Mouton & Co.

Hanneder, J., 1998, Abhinavagupta’s Philosophy of Revelation, Groningen:
Egbert Forsten.

Hobart, A. and B. Kapferer, 2005, Aesthetics in Performance: Formations
of Symbolic Construction and Experience, New York: Bergahn Books.

Hulin, M., 1978, Le principe de l’égo dans la pensée indienne classique:
la notion d’ahaṁkāra, Paris: Publications de l’Institut de Civilisation
Indienne.

Ingalls, D.H.H. ed., 1990, The Dhvanyāloka of Ānandavardhana with the
Locana of Abhinavagupta, tr. D.H.H. Ingalls, J.M. Masson and M.V.
Patwardhan, London: Harvard Oriental Series 49.

Iyer, K.A.S., 1980-81, “Bhartr̥hari on Sentence”, Adyar Library Bulletin,
44-45: 15-49.

Jhanji, R., 2003, “Abhinavagupta’s Concept of Pratibha”, Sandhana, 3(2):
67-78.

Johnson, W.J., 1994, The Bhagavad-Gita, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Joshi, S.D., 1977, “Bhartr̥hari’s Concept of Pratibhā: A Theory on the
Nature of Language Acquisition”, in Kumar et al. 1977.

Kaviraj, G., 1923-24, “The Doctrine of Pratibhā in Indian Philosophy”,
Annals of the Bhandarkar Research Institute, 5: 1-18; 6: 113-32.

Kotru, N.K., 1985, Sivastotravali of Utpaladeva: Sanskrit Text With
Introduction, English Translation and Glossary, Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass.

Krishnamoorthy, K., 1944, “Observations of Sanskrit Literary Critics on
Poetic Imagination”, Poona Orientalist, 9: 123-32.

———, 1980-81, “The Nature of Creative Pratibhā according to Kuntaka”,
Indologica Taurinensia, 8-9: 223-32.

Kulkarni, V.M. (ed.), 1986a, Some Aspects of the Rasa Theory, Delhi:
Bhogilal Leherchand Institute of Indology.

———, 1986b, “Abhinavagupta on the Alaukika Nature of Rasa”, in Kulkarni
(ed.), 1986a: 28-42.

Kumar, C.S., R.N. Dandekar, V. Raghavan, H.P. Schmidt, T.G. Mainkar,
S.N. Gajendragadkar, 1977, Some Aspects of Indo-Iranian Literary and
Cultural Traditions: Commemoration Volume of Dr. V.G. Paranjpe, Delhi:
Ajanta Publication.

Kunjunni Raja, K., 1963, Indian Theories of Meaning, Adyar Library and
Research Centre, Madras.

Lakshman Joo, S., 2008, Śivastotrāvalī of Utpaladeva: A Mystical Hymn of
Kashmir, tr. and ed. Ashok Kaul, with musical rendering in a CD by Manju
Sundaram, Foreword by Prabha Devi and Introduction by Bettina Bäumer,
New Delhi: D.K. Printworld.

Larson, G.J., 1969, Classical Sāṁkhya, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.

Marchianò, G. and R. Milani, eds., 2001, Frontiers of Transculturality
in Contemporary Aesthetics, Torino: Trauben.

Marjanovic, B., 2011, Stavacintāmaṇi of Bhaṭṭa Nārāyaṇa with the
Commentary by Kṣemarāja, Varanasi: Indica.

Masson, J.M., 1975, “When Is a Poem Artificial?: A Note on the
Ghaṭakar-paravivr̥ti”, Journal of the American Oriental Society, 95(2):
264-65.

Masson, J.M. and M.V. Patwardhan, 1969, Śāntarasa and Abhinavagupta’s
Philosophy of Aesthetics, Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Series 9.

———, 1970, Aesthetic Rapture, 2 vols., Poona: Deccan College.

Matilal, B.K., 1986, Perception: An Essay on Classical Indian Theories
of Knowledge, Oxford: Clarendon Press.

McCrea, L.J., 2008, The Teleology of Poetics in Medieval Kashmir,
Cambridge, MA and London: Harvard University Press.

Oberhammer, G. (ed.), 1998, Studies in Hinduism II, Miscellanea to the
Phenomenon of Tantras, Wien: Österreichische Akademie der
Wissenschaften.

Pandey, K.C., 1944, “Dhanañjaya and Abhinavagupta on Śāntarasa”,
Proceedings of the All India Oriental Conference, 12: 326-30.

———, 1963, Comparative Aesthetics, 2 vols., Varanasi: Chowkhamba
Sanskrit Series Office.

Pandit, B.N., 1997, Some Principles of Kashmir Śaivism, New Delhi:
Munshiram Manoharlal.

Parlier, B., 1975, La Ghaṭakarparavivr̥ti d’Abhinavagupta, Paris:
Institut de civilisation indienne.

Pollock, S., 2010a, Epic and Argument in Sanskrit Literary History:
Essays in Honor of Robert P. Goldman, New Delhi: Manohar.

———, 2010b, “What Was Bhaṭṭa Nāyaka Saying?: The Hermeneutical
Transformation of Indian Aesthetics”, in Pollock 2010a: 143-84.

Potter, K.H. ed., 1981, Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies, Advaita
Vedānta up to Śaṅkara and His Pupils, Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press. (Contributors: Edeltraud Harzer, S. Subrahmanya Sastri
and Allen W. Thrasher.)

Raghavan, V., 1967, The Number of Rasas, Madras: Adyar Library and
Research Centre.

Rao, S., 1998, Perceptual Error: The Indian Theories, Honolulu:
University of Hawai’i Press.

Sathaye, A., 2010, “The Production of Unpleasurable Rasas in the
Sanskrit Dramas of Ārya Kṣemīśvara”, Journal of the American Oriental
Society, 130(3): 361-84.

Schmithausen, L., 1965, Maṇḍanamiśra’s Vibhramavivekaḥ. Mit einer Studie
zur Entwiklung der inischen Irrtumlehre, Wien: Österreichische Akademie
der Wissenschaften.

Sen, R.K., 1965, “Imagination in Coleridge and Abhinavagupta: A Critical
Analysis of Christian and Shaiva Standpoints”, Journal of Aesthetics and
Art Criticism, 24: 97-107.

Sharma, B.N.K., 1961, History of the Dvaita School of Vedānta and Its
Literature, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.

Shulman, D., 2005, “The Buzz of God and the Click of Delight”, in Hobart
and Kapferer 2005: 43-63.

Shulman, D., 2008, “Illumination, Imagination, Creativity: Rājaśekhara,
Kuntaka, and Jagannātha on Pratibhā”, Journal of Indian Philosophy, 36:
481-505.

———, 2010, “Notes on Camatkāra” in Shulman 2010a: 249-75.

——— ed., 2010a, Language, Ritual and Poetics in Ancient India and Iran:
Studies in Honor of Shaul Migron, Jerusalem: The Israel Academy of
Sciences and Humanities.

Siauve, S., 1968, La Doctrine de Madhva, Pondichéry: Institut Françias
d’Indologie.

Silburn, L., 1964, La Bhakti: le Stavacintāmaṇi de Bhaṭṭanārāyaṇa,
Paris: E. de Boccard.

Sreekantiya, T.N., 1937, “Imagination in Indian Poetics”, Indian
Historical Quarterly, 13: 59-84.

Tieken, H., 2001, “The Pūrvaraṅga, the Prastāvanā, and the Sthāpaka”,
Wiener Zeitschrift der Kunde Sudasiens, 45: 91-124.

Tola, F. and C. Dragonetti, 1990, “Some Remarks on Bhartr̥hari’s Concept
of Pratibhā”, Journal of Indian Philosophy, 18: 95-112.

Torella, R., 1998, “The Kañcukas in the Śaiva and Vaiṣṇava Tantric
Traditions: A Few Considerations between Theology and Grammar”, in
Oberhammer, pp. 55-86.

———, 2000, “The Svabodhodayamañjarī, or How to Suppress the Mind with No
Effort”, in Tsuchida and Wezler, pp. 387-410.

———, 2002, The Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikā of Utpaladeva with the Author’s
Vr̥tti, Critical Edition and Annotated Translation, Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass.

———, 2004, “How Is Verbal Signification Possible, Understanding
Abhinavagupta’s Reply”, Journal of Indian Philosophy, 32: 173-88.

———, 2007a, “Passioni ed emozioni nelle filosofie e nelle religioni
dell’India”, in Boccali and Torella 2007: 22-32.

———, 2007b, “L’invenzione del desiderio”, in Boccali: and Torella 2007:
61-92.

———, 2009, “Introduzione: Passioni ed emozioni nelle tradizioni
filosofico-religiose dell’India premoderna”, Rivista di Studi Orientali,
80: 11-20.

———, 2011, The Philosophical Traditions of India: An Appraisal,
Varanasi: Indica Books.

———, 2013, Gli Aforismi di Śiva con il commento di Kṣemarāja
(Śivasūtravimarśinī), Milano: Adelphi.

Tsuchida, R. and A. Wezler (eds.), 2000, Harānandalaharī. Studies in
Honour of Prof. Minoru Hara on His Seventieth Birthday, Reinbeck: Velag
für Orientalistische Fachpublikationen.

Vatsyayan, K. and D.P. Chattopadhyaya, eds., 2008, Aesthetic Theories
and Forms in Indian Tradition, vol. VI, part I: History of Science,
Philosophy and Culture in Indian Civilization, New Delhi: Munshiram
Manoharlal.

Webster, D., 2005, The Philosophy of Desire in the Buddhist Pali Canon,
London: Routledge.

Williams, P., 1989, Mahāyāna Buddhism: The Doctrinal Foundations, New
York: Routledge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 As Gerow 1994: 186 puts it: “Since the publication of K.C. Pandey’s
pioneering Indian Aesthetics, one of the leitmotifs of scholarship on
Abhinavagupta’s remarkable aesthetic theory has been commentary on his
‘philosophical’ basis”. In particular, the philosophical “basis” of
Abhinavagupta’s Rasa Theory is the speculative assumption of Śāntarasa
and Abhinavagupta’s Philosophy, a very important work by Masson and
Patwardhan (1969). On the contrary, Gerow (1994) argues for the somewhat
“opposite” strategy of interpretation, namely, he argues for the
tenability and usefulness of examining Abhinavagupta’s metaphysical
theses in the light of his aesthetic speculations. As it will be clear
later, my proposal of interpretation is different still.

2 On camatkāra in secondary literature, see also Gnoli 1968: xlv-xlvii,
Gnoli 1985: 32, fn. 90; Hulin 1978: 343-58; Masson and Patwardhan 1969:
46; 1970: 17-18 and notes; Shulman 2005, 2010. For a bird’s-eye view on
camatkāra as an aesthetic concept after Abhinavagupta, see Sathaye 2010:
378-80.

3 See, for instance, Amaladass 1984. For a general bibliography on
dhvani, see Cahill 2004, sub voce.

4 The bibliography on pratibhā is extremely rich. On pratibhā in its
philosophical (and especially linguistic-philosophical) incarnation, see
Kaviraj 1923-24; Aiyar 1939; Joshi 1977; Christie 1979; Iyer 1980-81;
Tola and Dragonetti 1990. On pratibhā in its aesthetical incarnation,
see Sreekantiya 1937; Krishnamoorthy 1944; Gonda 1963: 318-48; Sen 1965;
Krishnamoorthy 1980-81; Jhanji 2003 and Shulman 2008.

5 See, for instance, Chakrabarti 2005.

6 Specifically, I am referring to Bӓumer 1997, 2003b and 2008.

7 Specifically — and I hope exhaustively — the occurrences are to be
found in the Vr̥tti ad Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikā 1.5.11, 4.1, 4.6; in the
Śivastotrāvalī 5.15, 13.14; in the Vr̥tti ad Somānanda’s Śivadr̥ṣṭi 1.8,
1.38.

8 Besides the already quoted articles by Bettina Bäumer that deal both
directly and indirectly with the text, the bibliography of translations
and studies on the Śivastotrāvalī is comparatively small. See, in
particular, Kotru 1985; Bailly 1987; Bonnet 1989 and Lakshman Joo 2008.
Some interesting remarks and analyses on the text are to be found also
in Fürlinger 2009: 71-132. The translation by Bailly has become so far
the standard English version of the text. Nevertheless, whenever
Bailly’s translation does not appropriately suit the purposes of the
discourse at hand, my own translation will be supplied. For reference
purposes, Bailly’s rendering will be offered at any rate in the
footnotes.

9 See, for instance, Śivastotrāvalī 2.21:

mumukṣujanasevyāya sarvasantāpahāriṇe ।

namo vitatalāvaṇyavarāya varadāya te ।।

The translation by Bailly reads as follows: “May you be glorified, O
Granter of Boons, / Who are served by those aspiring for liberation, /
and whose boundless depths of beauty / Dispel all afflictions.”

and Śivastotrāvalī 13.14-15, quoted in extenso in the following note.

10 Śivastotrāvalī 13.14-15:

yat samastasubhagārthavastuṣu sparśamātravidhinā camatkr̥tim ।

tāṁ samarpayati tena te vapuḥ pūjayanty acalabhaktiśālinaḥ ।।

sphārayasy akhilam ātmanā sphuran viśvam āmr̥śasi rūpam āmr̥śan ।

yat svayaṁ nijarasena ghurṇase tat samullasati bhāvamaṇḍalam ।।

It is worth noticing that, in translating the root āmrś- with the
not-too obvious “delighting/filling with delight”, the translator had
probably in mind the commentary by Kṣemarāja: tathā svarūpam āmr̥śan —
nijaṁ svarūpaṁ camatkurvan nikhilaṁ viśvam āmr̥śasi āsvādanena
ānandaghanaṁ ghaṭasi.

11 I am obviously oversimplifying the issue for the sake of expounding
my previous, implicitly naïve, line of reasoning.

12 Another “aesthetical” work of Abhinavagupta — worth mentioning at
least in a footnote, although it will not be dealt with in the present
article — is the Ghaṭakarparakulakavivr̥ti (Commentary on the kulaka
called the Fragments of a Pot), a commentary on a short poem attributed
to Kālidāsa. For a translation thereof, see Parlier 1975. For a partial
study thereof, see Masson 1975.

13 Actually, only one single instance of the term alaukika rasa is
present in the whole Śivastotrāvalī, i.e. Śivastotrāvalī 1.21.

14 Furthermore, as far as the Sanskrit knowledge system is concerned,
there is practically no term for the concept of aesthetics proper, i.e.
for a discourse on sensory perception, although the issue of perception
and the senses play an absolutely central role in practically all Indian
traditions (see, for instance, Matilal 1986 for the discussion on the
centrality of pratyakṣa “perception” as the main pramāṇa “means of valid
knowledge”). On the contrary, as far as the existence of an art theory
is concerned, one finds, since a comparatively early date, the
speculations on “poetry”, i.e. the already quoted Alaṁkāraśāstra (the
first extant treatises are Bhāmaha’s Kāvyālaṁkār̥a and Daṇḍin’s
Kāvyādarśa, both seventh century ce; see Bronner 2012 for the thorny
issue of their theoretical relation and respective dating), and even
earlier speculations on “drama”, i.e. the aforementioned Nāṭyaśāstra
(Bharata’s Nāṭyaśāstra, tentatively dated between the second century bce
and the second century ce). Furthermore, it is precisely with
Abhinavagupta’s overarching theoretical narrative that these
speculations converge completely and become, at least theoretically, the
standard paradigm for the interpretation and comprehension of all
possible art forms (a partial fusion and somewhat consequential
innovation already occurred in Ānandavardhana’s Dhvanyāloka; see McCrea
2008). Therefore, also from an emic perspective (an insider’s point of
view, if you prefer) it is appropriate to keep separate the two
mentioned theoretical domains, “aesthetics proper” and “art theory”, in
so far as the former has no direct correspondence in the Sanskrit
knowledge system while the latter does, but only to a certain extent
(the full inclusion of arts such as sculpture and painting is late and
problematic) and only from a certain point of time onwards. A somewhat
dated but synthetic and still interesting introduction to classical
Indian aesthetics — “art theory” — as a whole is Gerow 1977.

15 As far as I know, there is no overall study on the concept of desire
in the Tantric tradition, let alone in the whole culture of pre-modern
India, and no systematic study to assess the status quaestionis. The
2015 volume by Purushottama Bilimoria and Aleksandra Wenta is the first
attempt at filling this gap in scholarship. Biardeau 1995 is a general
introduction to the Indian tradition, which deepens the notion of
“desire” beyond the common practice of introductory texts. A recent,
though not completely satisfying, book on desire in Indian philosophy is
Framarin 2009, to be read together with the review by Brodbeck 2010. As
far as the Buddhist Pāli Canon is concerned, see the interesting Webster
2005. Many more essays on single aspects of the concept of “desire”
might be quoted. In particular, a recent Italian book Boccali and
Torella 2007 and a recent issue, volume 80, of the Rivista di Studi
Orientali 2007 (published in 2009) are wholly dedicated to emotions and
desire in South Asia, but not only with regard to the Tantric
traditions. However, on the pivotal role played by desire as an
unavoidable force in the structure of the human being and of the whole
universe according to many Tantric currents, a passage from Torella’s
introduction to the aforementioned journal issue might well be quoted:
“L’universo — e qui è ancora il grande Abhinavagupta a parlare
(Tantrāloka 9.62) — è stato creato appunto per soddisfare le anime nelle
quali una frenesia (lolikā), una febbrile smania di fruizioni è stata
suscitata. Questa sottile frenesia non ha contorni né orizzonti, è per
così dire uno “stato desiderante” senza oggetto (niṣkarmā abhilāṣitā),
uno stato di indefinita aspettazione (Jayaratha: lolikā svātmani
sākāṅkṣateva) [The universe — it is again the great Abhinavagupta who
does the talking — has been created just to satisfy the souls in which a
frenzy (lolikā), a hectic crave for fruitions, has been kindled. This
subtle frenzy has no outline, nor horizons — it is, so to speak, an
objectless “desiring state” (niṣkarmā abhilāṣitā), a state of indefinite
expectancy (Jayaratha: lolikā svātmani sākāṅkṣateva)].” Along similar
lines, on rāga, again “attachment”, “primeval desire” as one of the
kañcukas (cuirasses) that both enable the single soul to act in the
world and prevent it from instantly realizing its unity with the supreme
consciousness, see Torella 1998 and 2007b.

16 By commenting saṁvinmārgo nīlapītādibodharūpaḥ panthaḥ, Kṣemarāja
points out that the cognitions Utpaladeva is talking about are, clearly,
sensory cognitions.

17 Śivastotrāvalī 1.10:

sarva eva bhavallābhahetur bhaktimatāṁ vibho ।

saṁvinmārgo ’yam āhlādaduḥkhamohais tridhā sthitaḥ ।।

The translation by Bailly reads as follows: “The path of the senses is
threefold, / Marked by pleasure, pain and delusion. / For the devotee
this is the path / That leads to your attainment.”

18 Śivastotrāvalī 16.26:

yato ’si sarvaśobhānāṁ prasavāvanir īśa tat ।

tvayi lagnam anarghaṁ syād ratnam vā yadi vā tr̥ṇam ।।

The translation by Bailly reads as follows: “You are the fountainhead, O
Lord, / Of everything beautiful. / All things become precious at your
touch / Whether gem or piece of straw.”

19 Śivastotrāvalī 6.9:

kāṁ bhūmikāṁ nādhiśeṣe kiṁ tat syād yan na te vapuḥ ।

Translation by Bailly.

20 Śivastotrāvalī 3.11:

garjāmi bata nr̥tyāmi pūrṇā mama manorathāḥ ।

svāmī mamaiṣa ghaṭito yat tvam atyantarocanaḥ ।।

Translation by Bailly, slightly modified.

21 Śivastotrāvalī 13.8:

tattadindriyamukhena santataṁ yuṣmadarcanarasāyanāsavam ।

sarvabhāvacaṣakeṣu pūriteṣv āpibann api bhaveyam unmadaḥ ।।

Translation by Bailly.

22 Śivastotrāvalī 8.3:

lokavad bhavatu me viṣayeṣu sphīta eva bhagavan paritarṣaḥ ।

kevalaṁ tava śarīratayaitān lokayeyam aham astavikalpaḥ ।।

The translation by Bailly reads as follows: “Let me, like other people,
/ Yearn deeply for the objects of the world, / But allow me to view them
as your form, O Lord, without contradiction.” Quite pregnant is
Kṣemarāja’s commentary on astavikalpa, i.e. galitabhedapratipatti.

23 Śivastotrāvalī 8.5:

nijanijeṣu padeṣu patantv imāḥ karaṇavr̥ttaya ullasitā mama ।

kṣaṇam apīśa manāg api maiva bhūt tvadavibhedarasakṣati-sāhasam ।।

Translation by Bailly, slightly modified.

24 Kṣemarāja’s commentary on ŚSĀ 8.5 also stresses the same point by
glossing karaṇavr̥ttayaḥ with cakṣurādisaṁviddevyaḥ.

25 Śivastotrāvalī 2.23:

sukhapradhānasaṁvedyasambhogair bhajate ca yat ।

tvām eva tasmai ghorāya śaktivr̥ndāya te namaḥ ।।

The translation by Bailly runs as follows: “Homage to your terrifying
sense-goddesses! / Whatever they enjoy / Is all in offering to you.”

Kṣemarāja clarifies the already patent reference: śaktivr̥ndaṁ
saṁviddevīcakram (the multitude of powers is the circle of the goddesses
of consciousness).

26 For the text and the translation of the Vijñāna-Bhairava, see, for
instance, Bӓumer 2003a. On very similar teachings, see the
Svabodhodayamañjarī of Vāmanadatta, edited and translated in Torella
2000. Along similar lines, see the passage on the sensory organs of
Abhinavagupta’s Bhagavadgītārtha-Saṁgraha and the passage on the modes
of fruition in Kṣemarāja’s Śivasūtravimarśinī, both translated and
glossed in Torella 2007b: 82-84.

27 Vijñāna-Bhairava 117:

yatra yatrākṣamārgeṇa caitanyaṁ vyajyate vibhoḥ ।

tasya tanmātradharmitvāc cillayād bharitātmatā ।।

28 For the study of the passage in the light of the commentaries, see
Torella 2013: 210-15.

29 A recent translation of both Bhaṭṭa Nārāyaṇa’s text and Kṣemarāja’s
commentary has been published by Marjanovic 2011. An old and important
translation of the hymn is by Silburn 1964.

30 Marjanovic 2011: 19 dates Bhaṭṭa Nārāyaṇa as living between the late
ninth and the early tenth century ce, while Silburn 1964: 8 assigns him
to the ninth century, possibly under the reign of Avantivarman (ce
855-83). In both cases, it is probable that Utpaladeva might have known
his work.

31 The following are two other interesting verses from the same text by
Bhaṭṭa Nārāyaṇa that might be quoted in this respect, specifically on
painting as a metaphor of the world (jagaccitra):

Stavacintāmaṇi 9:

nirupādānasambhāram abhittāv eva tanvate ।

jagaccitraṁ namas tasmai kalāślāghyāya śūline ।।

“Adoration to [Śiva] the bearer of the trident, praised thanks to its
art [or to the digits of the moon on his forehead], for he draws the
world picture even with no canvas, no material cause and no instrument.”

Translation in Bӓumer 2008, slightly modified.

Stavacintāmaṇi 80:

muhur muhur jagaccitrasyānyānyāṁ sthitim ūhitum ।

śaktir yā te tayā nātha ko manasvī na vismitaḥ ।।

“O Lord, is there any sensible man who is not amazed by your power,
capable to conceive, at every moment, the ever new conditions of the
world picture?”

Translation in Bӓumer 2008, slightly modified. It is worth noticing that
Kṣemarāja, in his commentary on this verse, does not refer to the
jagaccitra as a metaphorical expression drawn from the field of the
arts, as he does — at least implicitly — in the case of his commentary
on verse 59.

32 Bhaṭṭa Nārāyaṇa’s Stavacintāmaṇi 59:

visr̥ṣṭānekasadbījagarbhaṁ trailokyanāṭakam ।

prastāvya hara saṁhartuṁ tvattaḥ ko ’nyaḥ kaviḥ kṣamaḥ ।।

In this verse, the grand metaphor of “the world as drama” is supported
by the use of some technical terms borrowed from the theatrical domain,
imbued with a double meaning, on one side, cosmological, and theatrical,
on the other (such as bīja, the first of the “five elements of dramatic
actions” or arthaprakr̥tis, i.e. the seed of the dramatic action, an
event that contains in nuce the whole development of the drama, see NŚ
19.22 and Bansat-Boudon 1992: 130-31 or the material cause of the whole
universe [māyāprakr̥tyādi according to Kṣemarāja’s commentary], and
prastāvanā, the introductory portion of every drama see Bansat-Boudon
1992: 76-77 and Tieken 2001 or the actual act of initiating the universe
as such). Unfortunately, the commentary of Kṣemarāja on this portion of
the text is partially lacunose. Anyway, as Kṣemarāja himself says,
further expatiating on the technicalities of Nāṭyaśāstra would not be
useful for the matter under discussion (prakr̥tānupayogῑ).

33 Vijñāna-Bhairava 41:

tantryādivādyaśabdeṣu dīrgheṣu kramasaṁsthiteḥ ।

ananyacetāḥ pratyante paravyomavapur bhavet ।।

“If one listens with undivided attention to the sounds of string
instruments and others which are played successively and are prolonged,
then one becomes absorbed in the supreme ether of consciousness.” —
Translation in Bӓumer 1997

Vijñāna-Bhairava 73:

gitādiviṣayāsvādāsamasaukhyaikatātmanaḥ ।

yoginas tanmayatvena manorūḍhes tadātmatā ।।

“When the mind of a yogī is one with the unparalleled joy of music and
other (aesthetic delights),

Then he is identified with it due to the expansion of his mind which has
merged in it.” — Translation in Bӓumer 1997

34 For some telling examples, see the already mentioned crucial terms
such as camatkāra, pratibhā or dhvani and the bibliography quoted above.
The study of Kṣemarāja’s use of quotations and speculations in glossing
the occurrences of these, and related, “aesthetically loaded” terms in a
non-strictly aesthetic context remains, for instance, a scholarly
desideratum.

35 An important case study, in this regard, could be represented by an
inquiry into the use of the “drink metaphor” in Utpaladeva’s
Śivastotrāvalī. Briefly, the standard metaphor for the enjoyment of the
absolute — be it in a relation of complete identity or in the loving
relation of the devotee brimful of the sentiment of bhakti — is the
drinking of a psychotropic liquid. The array of synonyms used for such a
drink (sudhā, pāna, rasa, amr̥ta, mada, pīyūṣa, asava, seka) or its
enjoyment (camatkāra, āsvādana, bhoga, etc.) is indeed stunning. Further
study is surely needed both on the remote origin (unmistakably Vedic,
cf. the soma juice) and the significance of such “drink metaphor”. As
far as its relationship with the rasa theory is concerned, my working
hypothesis is that it is the same “drink metaphor” that developed
independently, on the one hand, as a metaphor for any extremely intense
sensory experience that reaches the very essence of the appreciated
object — such as in the Śivastotrāvalī — and, on the other hand,
possibly along similar lines, as a metaphor for the experience of art —
first in the Nāṭyaśāstra, and consequently in Abhinavagupta’s grand
aesthetic theory (see below).

36 Obviously, I am not trying to argue that the previous works on
Alaṁkāraśāstra and Nāṭyaśāstra did not deal with what we would call
“art”, but simply that the inquiry into “art” was not yet completely and
consciously identified as a specific sui generis domain of theoretical
investigation, particularly in so far as the experience of art, the
“aesthetic experience”, was not yet considered independently as an
experience per se in opposition to ordinary experience (see below). But
I might be slightly overstating my point here.

37 Moreover, one might try and argue that, in his works that do not deal
directly with artistic phenomena, Abhinavagupta himself uses “art” and
art speculations simply as metaphors. But this line of inquiry would
require a separate investigation.

38 See Cuneo 2008-09. As convincingly argued by Pollock 2010b, a great
predecessor of Abhinavagupta and a direct source of his innovativeness
in the aesthetic field is the renowned Bhaṭṭa Nāyaka (see below).

39 See ABh ad NŚ 6, prose after 31, vol. 1, p. 281:
duḥkhasaṁśleṣavidveṣī sukhāsvādanasādaraḥ.

40 For a more detailed description of the psychological process briefly
outlined here, see Cuneo 2007.

41 The locus classicus for the discrimination between laukika and
alaukika in Abhinavagupta’s works is Locana ad DhvĀ 1.18. For a list of
all the passages of Abhinavagupta concerning the alaukika nature of rasa
per se and a thorough analysis of the idea of alaukikatva — also in
relation to the Kantian concept of the autonomy of the aesthetic
experience — see the valuable article by Kulkarni 1986b.

42 Cuneo 2013.

43 It is worth remembering that, in the most widespread philosophical
perspectives of classical India, perception is regarded as the first and
foremost means of knowledge, the one that is to be followed and
believed. See Matilal 1986.

44 ABh ad NŚ 6, prose after 31, rasasūtra, vol. 1, p. 278: vastusatāṁ
kāvyārpitānāṁ ca deśakālapramātrādīnāṁ niyamahetūnām
anyonyapratibandhabalād atyantam apasaraṇe. Abhinavagupta actually seems
to maintain that this epistemic incongruence is only the secondary cause
of this generalization of emotions, whereas the primary cause is found
in the specific qualities possessed by the “ideal connoisseur”, the
sahr̥daya. For more on this theoretical nuance, see again Cuneo 2013, n
46.

45 Cuneo 2013.

46 These verses are Mālinīślokavārttika 1.280-81. The Sanskrit text runs
as follows:

kāmasthaṁ kāmamadhyasthaṁ kāmāṅkuśapuṭīkr̥tam ।

kāmena sādhayet kāmān kāmaṁ kāmeṣu yojayet ।।

kāmaḥ svīkartum icchaiva tadācchādanayogataḥ ।

viśvaṁ sādhayate kāmī kāmatattvam idaṁ yataḥ ।।

The translation is by Hanneder 1998: 105, modified only in the last
hemistich, as I prefer to read the compound kāmatattvam as a bahuvrīhi,
while Hanneder reads it as a tatpuruṣa and consequently translates: “for
this [world] is the reality of desire”. The first hemistich of this
quote is also quite doubtful. Following the suggestion of Raffaele
Torella, one might emend the text on the basis of the well-known
confusion -aṁ/-aḥ. Consequently, the text would read: kāmasthaḥ
kāmamadhyasthaḥ kāmāṅkuśapuṭīkr̥taḥ. The translation would be: “He who
stays within desire, in the middle of desire, encapsulated by the hook
of desire, shall obtain desires by means of desire. He shall merge
desire into desires” which would also improve the scarcely convincing
“willingly” for kāmam in the last pāda. Again, it is Raffaele Torella’s
suggestion that the expression puṭīkr̥ta might refer to the well-known
ritual procedure to “place” a mantra before and after a ritual act or
object. In this way, the two mantras box it or encapsulate it, so to
say. It is therefore pervaded and sanctified by them. Anyways, whatever
the text and the meaning might be exactly, the centrality of desire in
this passage cannot be underplayed.

47 On account of the overt over-generalization — only partially
justified by the quotation of the following note — the inverted commas
are here a scholarly obligation.

48 The locus classicus for this view of desire as the “eternal enemy” is
obviously the astoundingly famous and influential Bhagavad-Gītā (BhG).
See, for instance, BhG III.36-41:

arjuna uvāca —

atha kena prayukto ’yaṁ pāpaṁ carati pūruṣaḥ ।

anicchann api vārṣṇeya balād iva niyojitaḥ ।।

śrībhagavān uvāca —

kāma eṣa krodha eṣa rajoguṇasamudbhavaḥ ।

mahāśano mahāpāpmā viddhy enam iha vairiṇam ।।

dhūmenāvriyate vahnir yathādarśo malena ca ।

yatholbenāvr̥to garbhas tathā tenedam āvr̥tam ।।

āvr̥taṁ jñānam etena jñānino nityavairiṇā ।

kāmarupeṇa kaunteya duṣpūreṇānalena ca ।।

indriyāṇi mano buddhir asyādhiṣṭhānam ucyate ।

etair vimohayaty eṣa jñānam āvr̥tya dehinam ।।

tasmāt tvam indriyāṇy ādau niyamya bharatarṣabha ।

pāpmānaṁ prajahi hy enaṁ jñānavijñānanāśanam ।।

“Arjuna said:

‘So what is it that impels a man to do evil, Varshneya, even
unwillingly, as though compelled to it by force?’”

“The Lord said:

‘It is desire, it is anger, produced from the constituent of passion
[rajas], all-consuming, all-injuring; know that that is the enemy here.

As a fire is covered by smoke and a mirror by dust; as an embryo is
covered by a sac, this world is enveloped by that.

By this perpetual enemy of the wise, by this insatiable fire in the form
of desire, knowledge is obscured, Son of Kunti.

It is said that the senses, the mind, and the intelligence are its
locality; having obscured a man’s knowledge with these, it deludes the
embodied self.

Therefore, having first restrained the senses, Bull of the Bharatas,
strike down this evil thing, the destroyer of insight and knowledge.’”

— tr. Johnson 1994: 18.

For an Italian translation of this passage, along with five verses of
the Kashmiri recension of the BhG, which is even harsher against desire,
see Torella 2007a: 27-28.

49 Blurb written by Raffaele Torella and pre-circulated among the
speakers of the conference Utpaladeva, Philosopher of Recognition,
Shimla, Indian Institute of Advanced Study, 20-21 August 2010.

50 See, for instance, ABh ad NŚ 6, prose after 31, rasasūtra, vol. 1, p.
279: tathā hi loke sakalavighnavinirmuktā saṁvittir eva
camatkāranirveśara-sanāsvādanabhogasamāpattilayaviśrāntyādiśabdair
abhidhīyate. “To illustrate: in the ordinary world, words such as
rapture (camatkāra), immersion (nirveśa), relish (rasanā), savouring
(āsvādana), enjoyment (bhoga), accomplishment (samāpatti), dissolution
(laya) and rest (viśrānti), indicate nothing but the consciousness
completely freed from any obstacle whatsoever.”

51 Although I would argue that the depiction of aesthetic experience as
strictly akin to the mystical experience does not pertain specifically
to the śaiva Weltanschauung or to the philosophy of Pratyabhijñā. At
this junction, it is appropriate to deal with the concept of śānta rasa,
which has often been considered the point of convergence between
Abhinavagupta’s aesthetics and philosophy. Probably following the clues
offered by Udbhaṭa (Kāvyālaṁkārasaṁgraha 4.4) and Ānandavardhana (Vr̥tti
ad DhvĀ 4.26 and also 4.5), Abhinavagupta accepts the introduction of a
ninth rasa into the ancient list of eight (NŚ 6.15). This was called
śānta rasa, “rasa of pacification” (the need for its introduction
developed probably in a Buddhist or a Jaina milieu, or maybe as a result
of the search for a single dominant rasa in the Mahābhārata). This
aesthetic emotion derived from the successful representation of
“liberation”, the culmination of the mystical experience par excellence.
The whole śāntarasaprakaraṇa is devoted to this rasa, and, in particular
to the identification of its sthāyibhāva. Without plunging into the
details and the analysis of the soundness of the different opinions,
let’s state Abhinavagupta’s conclusion: the sthāyibhāva of śānta rasa is
the ātman itself, the immutable substratum of all the contingent
emotional possibilities. Therefore, as its stable state is the most
stable among the stable states, the śānta rasa represents the acme of
aesthetic experience per se. It is the supreme rasa, the fundamental
rasa of which the other rasas can be considered as mere modifications.
As Abhinavagupta states it in another passage (ABh ad NŚ 6, prose after
31, vol. 1, p. 270), eka eva tāvat paramārthato rasaḥ. This utterly
monistic move of Abhinavagupta — which has been called “rasa-synthesis”
(Raghavan 1967: 195-212) — has been recognized as the point of the
convergence between aesthetic speculations and philosophical theory.
However, on closer scrutiny, nothing specific to paramādvaita or śaiva
can be found in the description of śānta. On the contrary, its depiction
seems to follow a somewhat stereotypical and unspecified image of
liberation and its external traits. See, for instance, the first three
verses on śānta rasa attributed to Bharata and preceding Abhinavagupta’s
śāntarasaprakaraṇa (which, more or less implicitly, comments and
supports them): mokṣādhyātmasamutthas tattvajñānārthahetusaṁyuktaḥ ।
naiḥśreyasopadiṣṭaḥ śāntaraso nāma sambhavati ।। I ।।
buddhīndriya-karmendriyasaṁrodhādhyātmasaṁsthitopetaḥ ।
sarvaprāṇisukhahitaḥ śāntaraso nāma vijñeyaḥ ।। II ।। na yatra duḥkhaṁ
na sukhaṁ na dveṣo nāpi matsaraḥ । samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu sa śāntaḥ
prathito rasaḥ ।। III ।। My tentative translation is the following: “I.
What is called śānta rasa, taught as the summum bonum [in Theatre],
occurs when it arises from an inner self in a state of liberation and in
connection with its cause, namely [the aspiration towards] the goal of
achieving the knowledge of reality. II. One should realize that what is
called śānta rasa has its grounding in the inner self via the restraint
of the senses of cognitions as well as of the senses of actions, and is
conducive to the happiness of all living beings. III. When there is no
pain, no pleasure, no aversion and no passion, it is the śānta rasa that
is displayed, identical in all living beings.” In śaiva teachings,
contrarily to what has been outlined here, the absolute and its
achievement are characterized in somewhat different terms. For instance,
as stated in the Śivadr̥ṣṭi 3.87b-88, Śiva, the absolute, can never be
defined as quiescent or isolated (śānta, kevala). Therefore, the śānta
rasa is indeed the point of convergence between aesthetics and
religiosity, but a kind of religiosity characterized by an ecumenical
attitude, as I tentatively designate it. On śānta rasa, see Pandey 1944;
De 1959b; Raghavan 1967; Masson, Patwardhan 1969, 1970; Bhattacarya
1972; Gerow and Aklujkar 1972; Bhattacharya 1976 and Gerow 1994.

52 For instance, as remarked by Ingalls 1990: 200, “[i]n the final
ślokas to the chapters of his Locana Abhinava renders homage to the
powers or stages of Vāc: at the end of the First Chapter, to the parā
śakti; of the Second, to the paśyantī śakti; of the Third, to the
madhyamā śakti; and of the Fourth, to the vaikharī śakti. That speech
exists in four stages is a concept as old as R̥gveda I.164.45. [. . .] To
Tantric authors like Abhinava the four śaktis represent a double process
of evolution: on the metaphysical plane, from undifferentiated unity
through two intermediate stages, to the sensible everyday world of
diversity; on a linguistic plane, from the undifferentiated
śabda-Brahman, again through two intermediate stages to the physically
manifested speech by which worldly communication is carried on.” Then,
as far as the Abhinavabhāratī is concerned, consider, for instance, how
every introductory verse to the various chapters of the Abhinavabhāratī
is composed in praise of Śiva in the form of one of the thirty-six (or
thirty-seven) hierarchic tattvas (ontological principles) of śaiva
metaphysics, so that all the maṅgalas taken together represent a praise
to the whole cosmos in all its evolutes. For a general discussion on the
tattvas, see Tantrāloka 9, passim; Pandit 1997: 71-79 and Gnoli 1999:
693.

53 This issue is already treated in the well-known pioneering work by
Pandey 1963: 86-150.

54 Notwithstanding such valorization of desire in śaiva teachings, it is
also often the case that some passages of śaiva works share the
demonization of desire typical of “mainstream Brāhmanism” or, at least,
do not undervalue per se the apparently non-desirous states of
consciousness. For instance, even in Somānanda (see Śivadr̥ṣṭi 1.41cd-43,
3.53cd-56 and Utpaladeva’s Vr̥tti thereon), the category of śānta is not
denied and devalued in itself, as one might expect, but neither
attributed a special status. It is simply an existing state that occurs
in the scriptures, a specific (not-too-high) phase in the multilayered
structure of reality and manifestation. What really matters is that even
in such a state the energy of the absolute consciousness is anyway
present and throbbing, though in a lesser degree and in a far less
visible modality, contrarily to what the opponents might try to say by
stressing the pacified and static aspect of the term śānta. I thank
Raffaele Torella for this suggestion and reference, which allow me to
properly nuance my otherwise over-generalized picture.

55 Although aham and ātman are often just synonyms in Abhinavagupta’s
technical terminology (Raffaele Torella, personal communication).

56 This is clearly the doctrine of Yogācāra Buddhism. See, for instance,
Williams 1989: 84-102.

57 This might be a vague hint to some form of dualism, possibly of a
kind similar to the Dvaita Vedānta of the much later Madhva. But this
would at best be mere guesswork. On Madhva, see Sharma 1961 and Siauve
1968. Or maybe some kind of corruption of anvitābhidhāna, although it
does not seem really pertinent here. Otherwise, it might be a concise
way to refer to both anvitābhidhāna and abhihitānvaya, with a tentative
translation of “the double [theory of] signification”. But, actually,
the reference remains impervious to all my attempts of understanding.

58 This is clearly a reference to the theory of sphoṭa developed in the
grammatical tradition (Vyākaraṇa). See, for a quick overview of the
subject matter, Kunjunni Raja 1963: 95-148. It is worth mentioning here
that Abhinavagupta did not accept the theory of sphoṭa (see Torella
2004).

59 This might be a reference to the theory of causation — in particular,
the pre-existence of the effect in the cause — upheld by Sāṁkhya, and
hence to Sāṁkhya itself. See, for instance, Larson 1969.

60 This might be a reference to some kind of monism, maybe some sort of
Advaita Vedānta. See, for instance, Potter 1981.

61 ABh ad NŚ 6.38, vol. 1, p. 294: atra ca vijñānavādo dvidhābhidhānaṁ
sphoṭatattvaṁ satkāryavāda ekatvadarśanam ityādi draṣṭavyam । vayaṁ tu
prakr̥tānupayogiśrutalavasandarśanamithyāprayāsasaṁśrayam
asuśikṣitapūrviṇa ity āstām. The passage is not overtly clear, to say
the least, and the translation remains doubtful. But its use as a
rhetorical device for furthering the ecumenical nature of
Abhinavagupta’s hermeneutical enterprise does not appear doubtful.

62 See the preceding notes for some more or less educated guesses.

63 For instance, see Abh ad NŚ 1.107, vol. 1, p. 36, where, after
defining the kind of cognition that the peculiar status of the aesthetic
experience elicits, Abhinavagupta adds: “Furthermore, this [kind of
cognition] might well be [interpreted as] a mere form of knowledge,
something superimposed on an actual form, something having [only]
generic features, a creation restricted to that specific time [proper to
the artwork] or something else. Here we will not annoy the connoisseurs
with an irrelevant topic, whose result would be the presentation on our
part of an amount of information on other systems of knowledge that
would be nothing but an obstacle to the illustration of the subject
matter (tac ca jñānākāramātram āropitasvarūpaṁ sāmānyātmakaṁ
tatkālanirmitirūpaṁ cānyad vā kiñcid astu । nātrāprastutalekhanenātmano
darśanāntara-kathāparicayaprakaṭanaphalena prakr̥tavastunirūpaṇavighnam
ācarantaḥ sahr̥dayān khedayāmaḥ).” With these four brief suggestive
definitions (jñānākāramātra, āropitasvarūpa, sāmānyātmaka and
tatkālanirmitirūpa), Abhinavagupta is probably referring to the
“aesthetic” cognition, proper to the theatrical sphere, as it might be
understood in various schools of Indian philosophy. The following
identifications might be attempted here, at least on a hypothetical
ground. The term jñānākāramātram, translated as “a mere form of
knowledge”, could be a reference to Yogācāra Buddhism. Along these
lines, the kind of cognition that occurs in watching a theatrical
performance might be interpreted in accordance with Yogācāra philosophy
and its conception of the external world of objects, i.e. like a mere
form or image of knowledge in which the object of this knowledge — the
real world — is ultimately non-existent (but the identification remains
doubtful). The term āropitasvarūpa, translated as “something
superimposed on an actual form”, might refer to the standard view of
Nyāya philosophy as regards the misapprehension of something, i.e. the
mother-of-pearl erroneously cognized as silver due to the
superimposition on the former, which is actually perceived, of some
characteristics of the latter, which is only remembered. The term
sāmānyātmaka translated as “something having [only] generic features”
might refer to the Prābhākara Mīmāṁsā’s theory of error, according to
which an erroneous perception amounts to the perception of only general
characteristics of the actually present object, which is therefore
correctly, yet incompletely cognized as, for instance, something bright
and lustrous, thus paving the way for one’s recollection of another
similarly bright object and eventually for the incomplete knowledge that
juxtaposes the two, but fails to distinguish the one from the other. The
term tatkālanirmitirūpaṁ, translated as “a creation restricted to that
specific time”, reminds of Vedānta’s theory of error, according to which
the erroneous cognition — and, on a different level, the whole world as
well, for what it matters — is an indescribable (anirvacanīya) creation
of māyā (illusion). On the theory of error in Indian philosophy, see
Schmithausen 1965; Matilal 1986: 180-220; Rao 1998 and Torella 2011:
187-88. Just as in the case of the previously quoted passage, the
importance is not in the attempted identifications — speculative in
nature — but in the intended ecumenical stand that Abhinavagupta seems
to be taking: namely, with respect to his aesthetic theory, every
possible philosophical theory can be accepted to explain it, as far as
the essential points of his own rasa theory are kept intact.

64 This is actually my tentative emendation for tatsamudāyarūpāṇi.

65 With regard to the same attitude shown in the Locana, see, for
instance, how the various classical theories of meaning are all
mentioned on the same plane of value in Locana ad DhvĀ 4.7 (translation
of this passage in Ingalls 1990: 712).

66 It is worth trying to illustrate the possible meaning of the
comparison. According to the theory of sphoṭa upheld by the
grammarian-philosopher Bhartr̥hari and his followers, with respect to the
utmost reality of the sentence and the sentence-meaning, words and
word-meanings are ultimately unreal. Similarly, the great rasa is alone
real, while the other rasas are comparatively unreal. According to the
anvitābhidhāna theory, upheld by the Mīmāṁsaka Prabhākara and his
followers, the words are real and constitute the actual elements of
language, but they do not convey meaning except in the context of the
sentence. Therefore, they are indeed real, but only as instruments for
the understanding of the sentence meaning. Similarly, the various rasas
can be considered real, but only in so far as they make savour the
“great fundamental rasa”. According to the abhihitānvaya theory, upheld
by the Mīmāṁsaka Kumārila Bhaṭṭa and his followers, sentence meaning is
simply the concatenation of the individual meanings expressed by words.
Similarly, the rasas are only the individual elements that constitute
the “great fundamental rasa”. For the first general references, see
Kunjunni Raja 1963: 95-148 on the doctrine of sphoṭa, 193-203 on the
doctrine of anvitābhidhāna and 203-13 on the doctrine of abhihitānvaya.

67 For instance, Abhinavagupta’s aesthetic theory is accepted and
developed by authors such as the Kashmirian Mammaṭa, probably of śaiva
affiliation, in his Kāvyaprakāśa, the Jain Hemacandra in his
Kāvyānuśāsana, up to the Vaiṣṇava Viśvanātha in his Sāhityadarpaṇa (even
the vedāntin Jagannātha Paṇḍita in his Rasagaṅgādhara is heavily
influenced by Abhinavagupta, although it is true that he deviated from
many crucial theoretical points). For a bibliography on these authors,
see Cahill 2004, sub voce.

4

New Fragments of the Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti1

Yohei Kawajiri

Introduction

The Pratyabhijñā school is named after the work of Utpaladeva (c.
925-75) who is a disciple of Somānanda (c. 900-50), though Somānanda is
recognized as the founder of the Pratyabhijñā school. According to
Madhurāja (c. 1000-50) who was from south India and travelled to Kashmir
to become a disciple of Abhinavagupta (c. 975–1025), the following works
are regarded as the authoritative Pratyabhijñā texts:2

• Īśvarapratyabhijñā-kārikā (ĪPK) of Utpaladeva

• Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vr̥tti (ĪPVr̥) of Utpaladeva

• Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti/ṭīkā (ĪPViv) of Utpaladeva

• Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vimarśinī (ĪPV) of Abhinavagupta

• Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti-vimarśinī (ĪPVV) of Abhinavagupta

The ĪPViv is a commentary on the ĪPK and ĪPVr̥, both of which are written
at the same time. The ĪPV and the ĪPVV are commentaries on the ĪPK and
the ĪPViv, respectively. Among these, the ĪPViv is only extant in a
fragmentary form. After Torella published an article on the ĪPViv in
1988, he recently edited a part of the ĪPViv in his articles.3 His
edition is based on a transcript copied by K.C. Pandey himself and the
original of it. The original manuscript written in Śāradā script (Skt.
ms No. 30) was discovered in the National Archives of India, New Delhi.4
It contains the part of the ĪPViv relative to ĪPK1.3.6-1.5.3 and the
introduction to ĪPK 1.5.4-5.

At present, this is a unique manuscript of the ĪPViv, though so
fragmentary. Except this part of the ĪPViv edited by Torella, one can
glean some passages of the ĪPViv not only from the works of
Abhinavagupta and Kṣemarāja but also from the footnotes of the KSTS
edition of the ĪPV.5 According to Torella (2007c: 479, fn. 8), those
footnotes must have been in the margin of a manuscript of the ĪPV, that
given the siglum Gh in the edition of the ĪPV.6

In the course of search for the manuscripts of the Pratyabhijñā works, I
acquired photocopies of a manuscript of the ĪPK along with the ĪPVr̥ (ms
No. 4408) kept in the Akhila Bhāratīya Saṁskrit Parishad, Lucknow.7 This
manuscript is written in Devanāgarī script and contains marginal notes
here and there. I began examining them. Very soon, I realized that some
passages in the margin are from the ĪPViv, by means of collating them
with the already edited text of the ĪPViv, and expected that there would
be new fragments of the ĪPViv in the margin. With reference to this
manuscript, it is noteworthy that most of the passages in the margin are
from the Pratyabhijñā texts. A scribe of this manuscript seems to
confine himself to add his own comments.

In this paper, I will present new fragments of the ĪPViv. This paper is
devoted to the diplomatic edition of the new fragments of the ĪPViv
relative to ĪPK1.1.1-1.5.3.

Editorial signs in the apparatus and the diplomatic edition

T the reading of the edition by Torella

? illegible akṣara(s) or part of an akṣara due, e.g. to blurring

+ lacunae in the manuscript

< > contain added akṣara(s) in the manuscript (the position is indicated
in the margin)

[ ] contain unclear akṣara(s) or part of an akṣara that is unclear due,
e.g., to blurring

{ } contain akṣara(s) deleted in the manuscript

v sign of insertion added above the line

^ sign of insertion added below the line

Fragments Corresponding to Torella’s Edition

As a beginning, we will examine the passages of the ĪPViv in the
manuscript with the help of the edition of the ĪPViv. Though there are
also passages from the ĪPV and so on in the margin, they are not given
here since they are not in question.

ĪPViv1.3.6:

(6r) vyatiriktārthaprakāśanam api jñānānāṁ svarūpam eva na tv arthasya
ko py atiśayas tac ca tasya rūpaṁ nānyasya jñānasya svarūpatām eti
yenānyaviviṣaye* nyasyāpīti viṣayamelanaṁ syāt tadā** jñānāni
svātmamātreti

*yenānyaviṣaye T.8

**tad āha T.9

— Torella 1988: 144, ll. 7-10

ĪPViv1.3.7:

(6r) yujyate* punar etādr̥śo vyavahāro yady eṣām anubhavasmr̥tyādīnāṁ
cinmātrasāratvenaika evātmā syād yasyaitā** viśvātmanaḥ parameśvarasya
jñānādikā*** vicitrāḥ śaktayo nyathā tu na syād ity āha na cetyādi****
।।

*yujyeta T.10

**yasyaiva T.

***etā jñānādikāḥ T.

****āha na cetyādi not found in T.11

— Torella 2007a: 477, ll. 20-22

This fragment gives the avataraṇikā of the ĪPViv to ĪPK 1.3.7. Though,
as Torella pointed out, another part of the ĪPViv which contains the
expression śaktiyogalakṣaṇaṁ ca seems to be mentioned in the ĪPVV,12 it
is also not found in this fragment. We may say that that part of the
ĪPViv has not come down to us or occurs in elsewhere.

(6r) bhinnāvabhāsinām api cārthānāṁ cidekarūpatve tadviṣayāṇāṁ jñānānām
avivādasiddham eva tadātmakatvam

— Torella 2007a: 477, ll. 31-32

(6v) tad evam ekāṁtarmukhasvasaṁvedanarūpacit-tattvātmatāviśrāntiṁ
vi[jñā]nānām* aiṁdriyakānām** apy anyonyaṁ sahabhāvapr̥thagbhāvaprakāśo
na syād ity arthānām api sadasattāniyamaniścayo na syāt tataś ca
sarvavyavahārocchedaprasaṁgaḥ tasmād eṣām ekacittattvaviśrāṁti{ma}rūpam
anusaṁdhānam avaśyābhyupagaṁtavyaṁ tad āha śeṣapadārthajñānā-nām*** iti

*vinā jñānānām T.13

**aindriyakāṇām T.14

***aśeṣapadārthajñānām T.15

— Torella 2007a: 480, ll. 3-7

(6v) [. . .]śrāṁti[. . .]saṁdhā[. . .]kaśabdo pi vivr̥taḥ — Torella
2007a: 480, ll. 7-8

(6v) smr̥tir api pūrvāvabhāsitavastunaḥ pūrvāvabhā-sitatvena
vartamānakāle prakhyāpanaśaktiḥ deśakālaviśeṣāvacchedaśūnyatvena
vicitrecchāprati-bodhitāvabhāsabhedavāsanāmātropapāditavi-
kalparūpavikalparūpavijñānā ’pohanaśaktiḥ*
śaṁkita-pratipakṣapratikṣepapatvād** vikalpānāṁ

*vicitrecchābodhitā- T,16 -upapāditavikalparūpavijñānā- T.17

**-pratikṣepaparatvād T.18

— Torella 2007a: 480, ll. 14-17

ĪPViv 1.4.1

(6v) smr̥tyādīnām idānīṁ jñānena prakaraṇenānena* svarūpaṁ nirūpayinn**
aśeṣakālānugatasvataṁtrā-vabodha-lakṣaṇātmatatvasvabhāveśvaraśaktirūpatāṁ
pratipipādayiṣuḥ smr̥ter eva tāvat suspaṣṭam īśvarātmasiddhihetutayā
prathamaṁ saṁbhavam āha sa hītyādi***

*jñānaprakaraṇenānena T.

**nirūpayiṣyann T.19

***sa hītyādi not found in T.

— Torella 2007b: 544, ll. 2-5

This fragment, which gives the avataraṇikā of the ĪPViv to ĪPK1.4.1, is
also found in the footnote 17 of the ĪPV I 115.20

(6v) bodhātmano nityatvenaitadavibhaktāyā boddhr̥tāyā nityatve pi
tattattathānirmitavibhinnadeśakālopasarja- nārthoparāgeṇa
bodhaikarūpasyārthānubhavasyāpi* bhinnakālatvena pūrvapaścādvyavahāraḥ
tad āha paścād apīti ।।

*bodhaikarūpasyārthānubhavasyāpi ca T.

— Torella 2007b: 544, ll. 11-14

With reference to the part of tattatathānirmita-, Torella points out
that Abhinavagupta seems to have a partly different text. However, this
fragment accords with the text edited by Torella.21

(6v) anubhavasmaraṇakālavyāpitvaṁ sa parato pi sann iti sūtre nirdiṣṭaṁ
। vivr̥taṁ ca paścād api pūrvānu-bhūtārthānubhavitr̥tvād iti ।।

— Torella 2007b: 545, ll. 17-18

ĪPViv 1.4.2

(7r) smr̥tivikalparūpaparāmarśasamaye deśakālādy-avacchedavat*tathā
’ṁtaḥsthitasya vahir api tad idam ityādisarvanāmanirdeśasyārthasya**
sāmarthyād eva prakāśo bhavatīty āha bhāsayec cetyādi*** ।।

*deśakālādyavacchedāt T.

**-nirdeśyasyārthasya T.22

***bhāsayec cetyādi not found in T.

— Torella 2007b: 546, ll. 1-3

This fragment gives the avataraṇikā of the ĪPViv to ĪPK1.4.2. The
reading deśakālādyavacchedāt is to be corrected to
deśa-kālādyavacchedavat- as given in this fragment, which is supported
by the ĪPVV.23 Also, it seems to me that va just before
-ttathāntaḥsthitasya is dropped or blurred and only ā-diacritical mark
is left.

(7r) prakāśasvabhāvaś ca parāmarśo yathāsau tasyāvaśyaṁ prakāśamānatayā*
bhāvyam anyathā parāmarśanam eva nopapadyeta ’to tra nāsti vivādaḥ

*avaśyaṁ prakāśanena tathā T.

— Torella 2007b: 546, ll. 14-16

(7r) sūtre liṅartho niyogakaraṇalakṣaṇe vivr̥taḥ

— Torella 2007b: 546, ll. 16-17

(7r) [ke]valaṁ yad yathā parāmr̥śyate tat tathaivāva-bhāsyate smr̥tau ca
pūrvaprakāśitasya parāmarśāt pūrvaprakāśitatvenaivābhāsas tad āhānyathā
prakāśitasya parāmarśo na kr̥taḥ syād iti eṣa eva cānubhūtāsaṁpra-mauṣaḥ*
।।

*cānubhūtaviṣayāsampramoṣaḥ T.

— Torella 2007b: 546, l. 17; 547, l. 1

(7r) pūrvaprakāśitatvaṁ ca pūrvātītadeśakālapramātrā-
kāraviśeṣāvacchedenaiva prakāśanād bhavati tad āha svasattākāla eva ceti
25।।

— Torella 2007b: 547, l. 1; 547, l. 2

(7r)++++[tvāc ca bhogava]śena* smr̥t{i}āv upajāya**++++++++++sasyaiva
kāṁcanādyābhā-sāsaṁ***+++++++++++payogaṁ
pūrva-deśakālābhyā****++++++++++āt svalakṣaṇarūpasya smara+++++++sphuṭo
sāv avabhāso bhavati tad āha kadācit tv iti ।। 25

*ābhogavaśena T.24

**upajātāyāṁ T.25

(***kāṁcanādyābhāsāsambhinnasya- T.26)

****pūrvadeśakālābhāsādi- T.

— Torella 2007b: 547, ll. 14-17

(7r) yadā punar arthitāvaśenaiva sadghaṭakāṁcana-lohitatvādyābhāsa{s tad
āha}saṁvedanenaiva pūrva-dikkālādyābhāsasaṁbhedina* evārthāsya smaraṇaṁ
tadā sphuṭa evāvabhāsas** tad āhānyadā tv iti ।।

* pūrvadikkālābhāsasaṁbhedinaḥ T.

**evābhāsaḥ T.

— Torella 2007b: 548, ll. 5-7

(7r) kadācit punar atyaṁtaikarasāvadhānodyuktasya*
niravaśeṣaviśeṣaṇāvabhāsasāmānādhikaranyāpattiviṣa- dīkr̥tasmaryamāṇo
rthaḥ** sākṣātkārasamaya iva*** sphuṭaṁ puraḥ sphurati tad
āhātiśayetyādi**** ।।25

(* atyantaikarasāvadhānodyuktasya T.27)

**-viśadīkr̥taḥ smaryamāṇaḥ T.

***sākṣātkāramaya eva T.

****atiśayanirantara iti T.

— Torella 2007b: 548, ll. 7-10

This fragment of the ĪPViv is quoted in the footnote 67 of the ĪPV I
125.28 It is to be noted that it has the reading sākṣātkārasamaya iva
instead of the reading sākṣātkāramaya eva which the text edited by
Torella as well as the footnote of the edition of the ĪPV has.29

ĪPViv 1.4.3

(7r) anubhavakāle* ca pūrvakālāvacchedenārthābhāsasya samarthitasya
vārtamānikasmr̥tiprakāśād** bhedo nopapadyate ity anubhavasmr̥tyābhāsayoḥ
śarīrībhūta eko rthas tayor apy ekatvam*** ākṣipatīti copadarśayan
praṣṭāraṁ**** kartāraṁ***** caikam upapādayati na cetiyādi****** 25

*smr̥tikāle T.30

(**vārtamānikasmr̥tiprakāśāt T.31)

(***ekatvam T.32)

****draṣṭāraṁ T.33

*****smartāram T.34

******na cetyādi not found in T.

— Torella 2007c: 479, ll. 2-5

This fragment gives the avataraṇikā of the ĪPViv to ĪPK1.4.3.

(7r) smr̥tiś ca jñānarūpaivety āha smr̥tiprakāśa iti — Torella 2007c: 479,
l. 16

(7r) smr̥tiprakāśasya tātkālikatvaviśeṣaṇena vartamānatoktyā
kāladvayānusaṁdhānāt smartr̥siddhir upakṣiptā 26

— Torella 2007c: 479, l. 16; 480, l. 1

(7v) ādigrahaṇenotprekṣādisaṁvid uktā 1 — Torella 2007c: 480, l. 10

ĪPViv 1.4.4

(7v) na ca prakāśamānatānyathānupapatyā prakāś-ānupraveśe pi ghaṭavad
grāhyāṁśāvasthānaṁ pūrvānubhavasya grāhikāṁśopāroheṇa* prathanād ity āha
naivetyādi** ।। 27

*grāhakāṁśopāroheṇa T.

**naivetyādi not found in T.

— Torella 2007c: 481, ll. 3-5

This fragment gives the avataraṇikā of the ĪPViv to ĪPK1.4.4.

(7v) smaraṇajñāne ghaṭādyarthākāra eva ekaḥ pūrvakālādyavacchinno
grāhyabhāvasthaḥ pr̥thaktvenedaṁtānirdeśe* vabhāti na tu
pūrvānu-bhavākāro parasmr̥tāv iti** na cāsau yogino
tīrthārtha-mātrajñāna*** iva pūrvānubhavo naiva prakāśate
’haṁkārāspadībhūtagrāhakāṁśānupraviṣṭasyāham**** anubhūvaṁ*****
mayānubhūto rtha iti vā pūrvānubhavasya smartr̥bodhaikhyena prakāśanāt 27

*idantānirdeśyo T.

**aparaḥ smr̥tāv iti T.35

***atītārthamātrajñāne T.

(****-grāhakāṁśā- T.36)

*****anvabhūvam iti T.37

— Torella 2007c: 481, ll. 11-16

(7v) vedyatātra prathamānatātātparyeṇoktā na tv anyā-yattaprakāśatvena*
vedanakarmatayā

*na tv anyāyattaprakāratvena T.

— Torella 2007c: 481, ll. 26-27

The reading anyāyattaprakāratvena is to be corrected to
anyāyattaprakāśatvena as given in this fragment.

ĪPViv 1.4.5

(7v) nanu prakāśānupraveśaṁ vinā prakāśamānatā mā bhūn na tu tāvataiva
prakāśyaprakāśakayor aikyāpattir grāhyabhāge eva grāhakād vicchinne
ghaṭādeḥ prakāśyasya prakāśābhinnasyāpi prathanāt tathā ca* yogināṁ
parapramātr̥bodhaḥ paratvenaivedaṁtayā prakāśate nyathā bhrāṁtiḥ syāt tat
kathaṁ jñānasya jñānāṁtaragrāhyatve** nubhavaviṣayāyāḥ smr̥ter aikyaṁ***
syād iti । āha yoginām iti । 28

*tathā T.

(**jñānāntaragrāhyatve T.38)

***smr̥ter anubhavena sahaikyam T.

— Torella 2007c: 481, l. 28 - 482, l. 4

This fragment gives the avataraṇikā of the ĪPViv to ĪPK1.4.5.

(7v) tad atra yoginām api parabodhaḥ svasaṁvinmaya evāvabhāsate nyathā
prāguktarītyā* bodhatāhāniḥ syāt ।।

*prāguktanītyā T.39

— Torella 2007c: 482, ll. 12-13

(7v) pramātraṁtaragatāḥ pramātrantarasthitāḥ-pramātraṁtarātmānas
tattadghaṭapaṭādi-bhinnabhāvaviṣayā* ity arthaḥ jñānānām
jñānāṁtaravedyatve svabhāvahāniḥ syād iti svabhāvapadam upāttaṁ nāpy
ubhayavedyateti pratipādanāya mātragrahaṇam ।। 28

*-ghaṭādi- T.

— Torella 2007c: 482, ll. 19-22

(7v) tad evaṁ sarvathā jñānānāṁ vedyavedakabhāvo*
grāhakabhāvenaikyāpattyā** svaparavibhāgasaṁskāra-bhraṁśe pi vastutaḥ
svasaṁvedanarūpatayaiva bhavatīti*** sthitam 29 ।।

*na vedyavedakabhāvaḥ T.40

**grāhakabhāvaikyāpattyā T.

***bhavanti T.41

— Torella 2007c: 484, ll. 13-15

(8r) vāstavena tu bodhaikātmanā pramāṇāṁtareṇaikyāpattir* eva
paramātmavedanaṁ** sarvajñasya tad āha yoginām paramātmatāpattir
eveti***

*bodhaikātmanā pramātrā pramātrantaraikyāpattiḥ T.42

**paramātmavedakatvaṁ T.43

***parātmatāpattir eva iti T.44

— Torella 2007c: 483, ll. 21-23

(8r) pramāṇāṁtaragatasaṁbaṁdhi*śarīrabuddhyākārot-tīrṇena bodhamātreṇa**
idaṁtāparatvena***

*tatpramātrantarasambandhi- T.

**bodhamātreṇātmanā T.

***idantayā paratvena T.

— Torella 2007c: 484, ll. 17-18

(8r) eṣa ca pakṣo noktanayena saṁbhavati ity abhyupagama-vādamātram
evedaṁ tad āha yadi tathā saṁbhaved iti

— Torella 2007c: 484, ll. 19-21

ĪPViv 1.4.6

(8r) yāpīdaṁtayaivānubhavaparāmarśakāriṇī smr̥tir udeti sāpi
vyavahāramātreṇa tathārūpā na tu vastusthityeti darśayann āha smaryate
ityādi*

*smaryate ityādi not found in T.

— Torella 2007d: 929, ll. 4-5

This fragment gives the avataraṇikā of the ĪPViv to ĪPK 1.4.6.45

(8r) yat punas tad etādr̥śaṁ darśanaṁ mamāsīd iti tadahaṁkārāspadasyaiva
tasya darśanasya* svarūpa-viśeṣakhyāpanāya** tathā vyākhyānaṁ yathā yo
sāv ahaṁ-pratītimātraviṣaya ātmā sa nitya iti

*tadahaṅkārāspadasyaiva taddarśanopasarjanam T.46

**dr̥ṣṭa ity eva svarūpaviśeṣakhyāpanāya T.

— Torella 2007d: 930, ll. 3-5

ĪPViv 1.4.7

(8v) pra+++++dr̥ṣṭapātināpi parāmarśena darśana-syāhaṁkārāspadasyaiva
parāmarśa ity āha yā cetyādi*

*yā cetyādi not found in T

— Torella 2007d: 930, ll. 12-13

This fragment gives the avataraṇikā of the ĪPViv to ĪPK1.4.7.47 This
fragment of the ĪPViv is quoted in the footnote 141 of the ĪPV I 142.

(8v) pratyakṣīkārasamaye ca kadācid darśanaṁ paśyāmīti svanāmnopādīyate
kadācid dr̥ṣṭa-syedaṁtādirdeśenaivobhayatrāpi* cātrāsmaccha-bdenaiva
darśanaparāmarśaḥ ahaṁ paśyāmīty asmaddr̥kchabdaprayogaṁ** vināpi ghaṭo
yam ity ahaṁkārāroheṇa*** darśanaparāmarśo sty evānyathā
ghaṭasyedaṁtāpratyakṣatvaṁ**** kathaṁ parāmr̥śyeta pratyakṣatvaṁ hy
arthasyāhaṁkāragocaro ta eva***** tad āha puraḥsthitārtheti******
pramātr̥mayam iti ca ।।

*idantānirdeśenaiva । ubhayatrāpi T.48

**asmacchabdaprayogam T.

***ahaṅkāreṇa T.

****ghaṭasyedantayā pratyakṣatvam T.

*****arthasya ahaṅkāragocaro ’nubhava eva T.

******puraḥsthita iti T.

— Torella 2007d: 931, ll. 1-5

A part of this fragment is quoted in the footnote 148 of the ĪPV I
143.49

ĪPViv 1.4.8

(8v) arthamātraparāmarśena smr̥tiḥ sa iti — Torella 2007d: 932, ll. 1-2

(8v) grāhakasya tāvad ahaṁkārabhāga eva prathā grāhyasyāpi
prakāśātmatāsāratvenaiva prakāśamānatā ghaṭate nānyatheti — Torella
2007d: 932, ll. 4-6

(8v) mauliko vicchedas tu mayīyaḥ tad āha māyā-kr̥tavicchinnetyādi* ।।

*māyākr̥tavicchedāv iti T.50 — Torella 2007d: 932, ll. 7-8

ĪPViv 1.5.3

(9r) prakāśamānatā evārthasya siddhiḥ sā ca prakāśa eva tasya cārthād
bhede ghaṭasya prakāśaḥ paṭasyāpi syād ity āha bhinne ityādi* ।।

*bhinne ityādi not found in T — Torella 2007d: 937, ll. 1-2

This fragment gives the avataraṇikā of the ĪPViv to ĪPK1.5.3.

ĪPViv 1.5.4-5

(9v) atha mataṁ vicitraghaṭapaṭādyābhāsakramasyaika-
paridr̥śyamānabodhamātrah[e]tutvāyoge* nyathānupa-pattyā vāhyo rthaḥ**
pratyakṣato pi sidhyed ity āha tattad ityādi***

*-ābhāsasyaikaparidr̥śyamāna- T.51

**bāhyārthaḥ T.

***tattad ityādi not found in T. — Torella 2007d: 938, ll. 10-11

This fragment gives the avataraṇikā of the ĪPViv to ĪPK1.5.4-5.

New Fragments

As we have seen, there are a number of passages of the ĪPViv in the
margin of the manuscript kept in the Akhila Bhāratīya Sanskrit Parishad.
Now let us turn to the marginal notes which are not identified with
already edited texts of the Pratyabhijñā works.

The words underlined in the text are those literally cited or
paraphrased in the ĪPVV.

(1v) svātmani mahe???? svātmanaḥ ka???svabhā[vasy?]papadyamānapar[ā]
tena pra[??]kr̥tasiddhivi??bhāvaḥ ??taḥ । kartarīti yuddhas? nī??lakṣaṇaṁ
kartr̥??prathanaṁ nirdiṣṭaṁ yaj jñātr̥??yām apy anugatam
anya??ni??tr̥tārūpā kartr̥tāpaś??lliśet sāpi ??ṣani śa??tr̥śatr̥no pā??vayo
dr̥?i??tmikāyāḥ pradarśanena

To my knowledge, this fragment does not come from any specific
Pratyabhijñā work. It seems to give some comments on ĪPK1.1.2-3.52

(1v) bhātabhāsamānarūpānusaṁdhānātmikā pratyabhijñā ।

This fragment that gives a definition of recognition seems to be from
the ĪPV, though not exactly.53

(1v) tasmād īśvare kārakavyāpāraḥ pramāṇavyāpāraś cānupayuktaḥ

(2r) paratra jñātr̥tvānumāpi kā

(2r) nanv ity ākṣepe ātmano jñānakriyāyogaiśvaryam ātmaiva tu nāsty
anupalaṁbhād ahaṁpratyayenāpi śarīrādyatirekeṇānyasyā pratīter ity āha
kṣipann āha nanv ityādi

This fragment gives the avataraṇikā of the ĪPViv to ĪPK1.2.1-2, which is
supported by the ĪPVV.54 However, the reading nanv ity ākṣepe is from
the ĪPV.55

(2r) ātmano jñānakriyāyogād aiśvaryam ātmaiva tu nāsty anupalaṁbhād
ahaṁpratyayenāpi śarīrādyatirekeṇānyasyā pratītir ity ākṣipann āha nanv
iti ।।

Strangely, this fragment gives the same avataraṇikā as the above.

(2r) avikalpake rūpaṁ etadvyatiriktasya anubhavituḥ saṁbaṁdhi

This fragment seems to be from the ĪPV.56

(2r) nanu aham iti śabdena kiṁ vikalpyate ।

(3r) nanv arthānubhavasaṁskārajatvāt smr̥tes tadanubhavāpāye pi
tadviṣayeṇaiva viṣayavattābhīṣṭāv ātmopagamo vyartha ity āha
yatraivetyādi

This fragment gives the avataraṇikā of the ĪPViv to ĪPK1.2.4cd,57 which
is supported by the ĪPVV.58 Here the reading pūrvārthānubhava- instead
of arthānubhava- is suggested in the ĪPVV.

(3r) tad evaṁ saṁskāramātrāt smr̥tyudgame siddhe nityatvād ātmanaḥ
saṁskārodayānudayayor avaicitryād kiṁcitkaratve kalpanāmātram etad
draṣṭāyaṁ sthirā ātmā nāma sattā cety āha tata ityādi ।।

This fragment gives the avataraṇikā of the ĪPViv to ĪPK1.2.6, which is
supported by the ĪPVV.59

(3v) anyā ca vr̥ttiḥ pariṇāmāt pariṇāmo hi pūrvasvabhā-vatirodhānenaiva
yathā ghaṭasya kāpālānivr̥ttis tu tasyaiva rūpasyāpratyastamitasya yathā
bhūtenaiva parāmr̥śamānasya yathā tathā vattena tadyathā devadattasya
gamana ghaṭasyodakāharaṇaṁ tadvr̥ttibhedānutattvabhedo bhavati tenaiva
rūpeṇāvādhitapratyajñāviṣayatvāt iti ca nr̥pativārtikaṭīkāyām ।।

This fragment is from the Nr̥pativārtikaṭīkā which does not seem to have
come down to us. The text, beginning with tadvr̥ttibhedā- and ending with
-viṣayatvāt, is found in the footnote 3 of the KSTS edition of the
Śivadr̥ṣṭi.60

(3v) ātmano jñānasya ca bodharūpatvāviśeṣe dvitvakalpanānupapannety āha
jñānaṁ cetyādi

This fragment gives the avataraṇikā of the ĪPViv to ĪPK1.2.7, which is
supported by the ĪPVV.61

(3v) jaḍo py asāv ity amathasya prakāśo bhavatīti sāṁkhyamatam āśaṁkate
।। sāṁkhy{ī}o yam abhijñānaṁ buddhivr̥ttirūpaṁ pūrvavad eva nopapannam
ity āha athārthasyetyādi ।।

This fragment gives the avataraṇikā of the ĪPViv to ĪPK1.2.8, which is
supported by the ĪPVV.62 The reading sāṁkhyo ’yam api instead of sāṁkhyo
’yam abhi- is suggested in the ĪPVV.

(3v) ataḥ pariṇāmād ayam anyo vr̥ttiśabdasyārthaḥ
avigalitasvarūpasatattvasyaiva bhānasya dharma-kalparūpāṁtarachāyā
dhāraṇaṁ ghaṭasyevodakāharaṇaṁ caitrasyaiva gamanaṁ vr̥ttir ucyate
pariṇāmas tu svarūpāṁtarapattir eveti nr̥pativārtikaṭīkāyām ।।

This fragment is also from the Nr̥pativārtikaṭīkā. The text, beginning
with avigalitasvarūpa- and ending with vr̥ttir ucyate, is quoted in the
footnote 3 of the KSTS edition of the Śivadr̥ṣṭi.63

(4r) evaṁ kalākārayor api jñeyam ।।

(5v) kārikopapattim āha

(5v) jaḍatvena viṣayasya kiṁcit kr̥taṁ

(6r) nanu kenaivam uktaṁ jaḍo dhyavasāyaḥ saṁvitsvabhāvo hy asau
jñānāvyatirekāt tad āha cidrūpo pīti

This fragment seems to give the avataraṇikā of the ĪPViv to ĪPK1.3.5cd.
It is noteworthy that this fragment is found in the footnote 21 of the
ĪPV I 102, in which the reading cidrūpo ’pīti64 is replaced by tata
ityādi.65

(6r) jñānāni svarūpamātrapariniṣṭhitāni anyonyarūpā- saṁsparśāt tataś ca
kramopajātatattadvicitraviṣayasaṁ-
vitsaṁtānamelanopapadyamānapravr̥ttiviṣayā
rthavi-śeṣaniścayābhāvenārthakriyālābho rthināṁ na syād iti
lokavyavahāroccheda ity āha evam ityādi ।।

This fragment gives the avataraṇikā of the ĪPViv to ĪPK1.3.6, which is
supported by the ĪPVV.66

(9r) svātmani abhinne sati padārthānāṁ bhedāvedanāt

(9r) svapratipattiḥ prakhyā paratra tatpratipādanaṁ upākhyā

Concluding Remark

We have seen:

1. in the manuscript of the ĪPK preserved in Lucknow, a number of
excerpts from the ĪPViv are found;

2. new fragments of the ĪPViv are found;

3. they are mainly from the avataraṇikā of the ĪPViv to the ĪPK; and

4. with reference to the part of the ĪPViv edited by Torella, the
fragments of this manuscript give not only the avataraṇikā but also part
of the commentary for the ĪPK and ĪPVr̥.

It is true that a part of the text of the ĪPViv has been transmitted in
north Indian manuscripts, but it is unlikely that the full text of the
ĪPViv has been transmitted there. At least, the scribe of this
manuscript did not have it. For, if he had known of it, he would have
given the part of the commentary for the ĪPK as well as the avataraṇikā
of the ĪPViv with reference to the part of the ĪPViv which are not
edited.

Nevertheless, what is important here is that we can glean the new
fragments of the ĪPViv from this manuscript. We should notice the
marginal notes of this manuscript not only from the aspect of gleaning
them but also from the aspect of the manuscript transmission of the
Pratyabhijñā texts. It is urgent that we should examine the rest of the
marginal notes in this manuscript.

Bibliography

Texts

ĪPK = Utpaladeva, Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikā (see Torella 2002).

ĪPV = Abhinavagupta, Īśvarapratyabhijñāvimarśinī, ed. Mukund Ram
Shastri, vols. I-II, KSTS XXII, XXXIII, Bombay, 1918-21.

ĪPViv = Utpaladeva, Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti/ṭīkā.

ĪPVr̥ = Utpaladeva, Īśvarapratyabhijñāvr̥tti (see Torella 2002).

ĪPVV = Abhinavagupta, Īśvarapratyabhijñāvivr̥tivimarśinī, ed. Madhusudan
Kaul Shastri, vols. I-III, KSTS LX, LXII, LXV, Bombay, 1938-43.

KSTS = Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies.

ŚD = Somānanda, Śivadr̥ṣṭi, ed. Madhusudan Kaul Shastri, KSTS LIV, Poona,
1934.

Translations and studies

Torella, Raffaele, 1988, “A Fragment of Utpaladeva’s
Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti”, East and West, 38: 137-74.

———, 2002, The Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikā of Utpaladeva with the Author’s
Vr̥tti. Critical Edition and Annotated Translation, 2nd edn., Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass. [1st edn. Serie Orientale Roma 71, Roma: Istitute
Italiano per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente, 1994.]

———, 2007a, “Studies on Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti — Part I:
Anupalabdhi and Apoha in a Śaiva Garb”, in Expanding and Merging
Horizons: Contributions to South Asian and Cross-Cultural Studies in
Commemoration of Wilhelm Halbfass, ed. K. Preisendanz, Vienna, pp.
473-90.

———, 2007b, “Studies on Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti — Part
II: What is Memory?”, in Indica et Tibetica. Festschrift für Michael
Hahn zum 65. Geburtstag von Freunden und Shülern überreicht, ed. Klaus
Konrad and Hartmann, Jens-Uwe, Wien, pp. 539-63.

———, 2007c, “Studies on Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti — Part
III: Can a cognition become the object of another cognition?”, in
Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d’Hélène Brunner, ed. D. Goodall and A.
Padoux, Pondicherry, pp. 475-84.

———, 2007d, “Studies on Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti — Part
IV: Light of the subject, light of the object”, in Pramāṇakīrtiḥ: Papers
Dedicated to Ernst Steinkellner on the occasion of his 70th Birthday,
part 2, ed. B. Kellner, H. Krasser, H. Lasic, M.T. Much and H. Tauscher,
Wien, pp. 925-39.

———, 2009, “Variazioni Kashmire sul Tema della Percezione dello Yogin
(yogipratyakṣa)”, Rivista degli Studi Orientali, LXXXI: 35-58.

———, 2012, “Studies in Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti — Part V:
Self-Awareness and Yogic Perception”, in Devadattīyam: Johannes
Bronkhorst Felicitation Volume, ed. Francois Voegeli, Vincent
Eltshinger, Danielle Feller, Maria Piera Candotti, Bogdan Diaconescu and
Mahlar Kulkarn, Bern, pp. 275-300.

(This research was supported in part by a Grant-in-Aid for JSPS
fellows.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 I would like to thank the Akhila Bhāratīya Saṁskrit Parishad for
allowing me to take copies of a manuscript used in this paper. I am very
grateful to Prof. Raffaele Torella for encouraging me to undertake this
work. My special thanks are due to Prof. David Peter Lawrence who kindly
corrected my English.

2 Śāstraparāmarśa 4: sūtraṁ vr̥ttir vivr̥tir laghvī br̥haty ubhe
vimarśinyau । prakaraṇavivaraṇapañcakam iti śāstraṁ pratyabhijñāyāḥ ।।
(Torella 1988: 137: Five commentaries on the Treatise [the Śivadr̥ṣṭi]
constitute the corpus of the authoritative Pratyabhijñā texts and these
are the sūtra [ĪPK], the vr̥tti, the vivr̥ti and the two vimarśinīs the
long one [ĪPVV] and the short one [ĪPV].)

3 See Torella 2007a, etc. See Appendix I and II.

4 For further details of this manuscript, see Torella 2007a.

5 They are sometimes introduced by the expression yathoktam
aṣṭasāhasryām.

6 This manuscript is now preserved in the National Archives of India,
New Delhi (Skt. ms No. 5).

7 For a critical edition of the ĪPK, this manuscript is not used by
Torella. See Torella 2002: xlvi-liv.

8 -viviṣaye in this fragment is a scribal error for -viṣaye.

9 In this fragment, an akṣara ha after tadā seems to be dropped.

10 Torella follows Abhinavagupta’s reading, though the manuscript of the
ĪPViv as well as this fragment has the reading yujyate. See ĪPVV I 273,
ll. 6-7: tad etat tātparyam avatāraṇikāyām āha yujyeta iti hetuhetumator
liṅā ।

11 na cetyādi in this fragment should be corrected to na ced ityādi,
because ĪPK1.3.7 begins with na cet. See ĪPK1.3.7: na ced
antaḥkr̥tānantaviśvarūpo maheśvaraḥ । syād ekaś cidvapur
jñānasmr̥tyapohanaśaktimān ।।

12 See ĪPVV I 273, l. 14: nāpi tatsvarūpātiriktā dharmadharmibhāvena
paraṁ vartamānā ity āha śaktiyogalakṣaṇaṁ ca iti ।

13 An akṣara nā after vi seems to be dropped.

14 aindriyakānām in this fragment is a scribal error for aindriyakāṇām.

15 śeṣapadārthajñānānām in this fragment should be emended to
aśeṣapadārthajñānām,

16 According to Torella (2007a: 480 fnn. 38, 39), the footnote 71 of the
ĪPV I 110 is based on a marginal note found in one of the manuscripts of
the ĪPV which is used for the KSTS edition. The text as quoted in the
ĪPV manuscript has vicitrecchāprabodhitā-, while this fragment does
vicitrecchāpratibodhitā-.

17 -vikalparūpavikalparūpa- is a scribal error for -vikalparūpa-.

18 -pratikṣepapatvāt is a scribal error for -pratikṣepaparatvāt.

19 nirūpayinn is a scribal error for nirūpayiṣyann.

20 The text as quoted in the footnote 17 of the ĪPV I 115 has
jñānaprakaraṇenānena.

21 Or, it may be that, in the ĪPVV, Abhinavagupta analysed tattat in
tattattathānirmita- into tena te, and then said in other words, namely,
bodhena and anubhūyamānāḥ. If so, tattat does not mean “various”, but
“[objects] which are being directly perceived (anubhūyamāna) by
perception (bodha).” See ĪPVV II 5, ll. 10-14: tena iti bodhena । te iti
anubhūyamānāḥ । tathā iti svarūpād avibhaktā api
bodhasvātantryaprakāreṇa nirmitavibhaktatām iva āpāditāḥ, ata eva
vicitraṁ kr̥tvā bhinnā bodhāc ca anyonyaṁ ca tata eva deśakālaviśeṣaṇā ye
arthāḥ, taiḥ prakāśamānair yaḥ uparāgaḥ, tena hetunā . . . । — See
Torella 2007b: 544, fn 18

22 Torella corrects -nirdeśasya in the manuscript of the ĪPViv to
-nirdeśyasya, which is supported by the ĪPVV. In the ĪPVV, Abhinavagupta
paraphrases nirdeśya as parāmr̥śya. See ĪPVV II 19, ll. 9-10: ata eva tad
ity anena vapuṣā parāmr̥śyo yo ’rthaḥ, tasya sāmarthyād iti . . . ।

23 See ĪPVV II 19, ll. 7-9: smr̥tirūpaparāmarśe
pūrvakāla-deśādyavacchedavān so ’rtho ’ntar iti indriyabhūmim atikramya
sthito ’pi bahir iti saṁvidbhāgāt vyatiriktatvena ahantāvibhaktaḥ . . .
।

24 Both the manuscript of the ĪPViv and this fragment have the reading
bhoga-. However, as Torella pointed out, the detailed comments of
Abhinavagupta refer to the reading ābhoga-. See ĪPVV II 25, ll. 20-23: ā
samantāt bhogaḥ saṁvedanāntarbruḍitānantabhāvasaṁskāramadhyanimagnasya
cidbhāvasya unmeṣanātmakapālanacarvaṇavyāpāro ’nveṣaṇātmā, ābhōgaś
cintāsantatilakṣaṇaṁ prāṇidhānam ।

25 The footnote 62 of the ĪPV I 124 reads as follows: yathoktaṁ
madhyapratyabhijñāyāṁ arthitāvaśāt smr̥tāv upajāyamānāyāṁ
ghaṭādyābhāsasyaiva kāñcanādyābhāsasaṁbhinnasyāpi yathopayogaṁ
pūrvadeśakālādyābhāsādyavacchedoparāgāt svalakṣaṇarūpasya smaraṇād asāv
avabhāso bhavati iti, svalakṣaṇe tu tatrāvabhāsonmeṣa eva kathita iti na
kaścid virodha iti । The text Torella edited is as follows: arthitvāc ca
ābhogavaśena smr̥tāv upajātāyāṁ ghaṭādyābhāsasyaiva
kāñcanādyābhāsāsambhinnasyāpi yathopayogaṁ
pūrvadeśakālābhāsādyavacchedoparāgāt svalakṣaṇarūpasya smaraṇād asphuṭo
’sāv avabhāso bhavati । tad āha kadācit tu iti । With regard to
upajātāyām/upajāyamānāyām, this fragment seems to have the reading
upajāyamānāyām. See Torella 2007b: 547, fn. 44.

26 Torella corrects -sambhinnasyāpi in the manuscript of the ĪPViv to
-asambhinnasyāpi, which is supported by this fragment. See Torella
2007b: 547, fn. 46.

27 Torella’s conjectural emendation for -ādhāna- in the manuscript of
the ĪPViv is supported by this fragment.

28 It reads as follows: yathoktam aṣṭasahasryām kadācit punar
atyantaikarasādhānodyuktasya
niravaśeṣaviśeṣaṇāvabhāsasāmā-nādhikaraṇyāpattiviśadīkr̥taḥ smaryamāṇo
’rthaḥ sākṣātkāramaya eva sphuṭam puraḥ sphurati . . .

29 See ĪPVV II 29, ll. 13-15: tāṁ vyācaṣṭe kadācit iti sākṣātkārasamaye
yāvadbhir ābhāsaiḥ pūrṇo ’rthaḥ pratyabhāsiṣṭa, tāvadbhir eva smaryate
yadā ।

30 The reading smr̥tikāle is Torella’s conjectural emendation for
bhūtakāle in the manuscript of the ĪPViv. This conjectural emendation is
supported by the ĪPVV. See ĪPVV II 33, l. 13: tad avatārayati saṁkṣepeṇa
smr̥tikāle ca iti ।

31 The reading vārtamānika- is Torella’s conjectural emendation for
vānumānika- in the manuscript of the ĪPViv. This conjectural emendation
is supported by this fragment.

32 The reading ekatvam is Torella’s conjectural emendation for ekataram
in the manuscript of the ĪPViv. This conjectural emendation is supported
by this fragment.

33 praṣṭāram is a scribal error for draṣṭāram.

34 The reading smartāraṁ is Torella’s conjectural emendation for
kartāraṁ in the manuscript of the ĪPViv. This fragment has the reading
kartāram.

35 The reading aparaḥ is Torella’s conjectural emendation for apara- in
the manuscript of the ĪPViv. This fragment has the same reading apara-
as the manuscript of the ĪPViv.

36 The reading -grāhakāṁśā- is Torella’s emendation for -grāhakāṁ cā- in
the manuscript of the ĪPViv. This emendation is supported by this
fragment.

37 The reading iti is Torella’s conjectural addition. anubhūvam is a
scribal error for anvabhūvam.

38 The reading jñānāntaragrāhyatve is Torella’s conjectural emendation
for jñānāntarāgrāhyatve in the manuscript of the ĪPViv. This conjectural
emendation is supported by this fragment.

39 The reading prāguktanityā which Torella’s edition has, being a simple
typo, is corrected to prāguktanītyā as given in the ĪPVV. See ĪPVV II
42, ll. 22–24: prāguktanītyā iti dr̥k svābhāsaiva . . . । (ĪPK1.3.2)
ityādyuktenanyāyena ।

40 In Torella 2007c: 484, Torella had made two emendations (addition of
na before vedyavedakabhāvo; bhavanti instead of bhavati). However, these
emendations are withdrawn in Torella 2012: 295, fn. 58.

41 Subsequently, Torella 2012: 295, fn. 58 has adopted the reading
bhavatīti.

42 pramātrā, not found in the manuscript of the ĪPViv, is restored by
Torella.

43 The reading -vedakatvam is Torella's conjectural emendation for
-vedanam in the manuscript of the ĪPViv. See ĪPVV II 47, ll. 10-11:
tattvam iti vivr̥ṇoti paramātmavedakam ity anena । tattvaṁ
paramātmavedakatvam ity arthaḥ ।

44 Changing his view with respect to Torella 2007c, Torella is convinced
that the reading parātmatāpattir eva iti is the correct one. See Torella
2012: 290, fn. 43.

45 Abhinavagupta seems to have a partly different text which contains
yāvat. Or, the text Abhinavagupta had in front of him may have had the
reading yāvat instead of yāpī- found in the manuscript of the ĪPViv and
this fragment. See ĪPVV II 53, l. 17: yāvat iti yadety arthaḥ ।

46 The reading taddarśanopasarjanam is Torella’s tentative restoration
for tasya darśanasya in the manuscript of the ĪPViv.

47 See ĪPV I 142, fn. 141: idam atra punaḥ saṁkṣepeṇa tātparyam
pratyakṣadr̥ṣṭapātināpi parāmarśena darśanasyāhaṁkārāspadasyaiva
parāmarśa iti ।

48 The reading idantādirdeśenaiva found in this fragment is a scribal
error for idantānirdeśenaiva. The edition of the ĪPVV has the reading
idantānirdeśena vā. See ĪPVV II 55, ll. 8–9: idantānirdeśena vā iti
darśanaṁ prarāmr̥śyate [sic] iti saṁbandhaḥ ।

49 See ĪPV I 143, fn. 148: ahaṁ paśyāmi iti hi asmacchabdaprayogaṁ
vināpi iti ।

50 If Utpaladeva quotes the ĪPVr̥ here, the reading māyākr̥tavicchedāv iti
should be corrected to māyākr̥tavicchinnetyādi given in this fragment. It
is, however, to be noted that Abhinavagupta seems to have a partly
different text of the ĪPVr̥ which reads māyākr̥tavicchedau instead of
māyākr̥tavicchināvabhāsau. See ĪPVr̥ 1.4.8: . . .
māyākr̥tavicchinnāvabhāsāv api prakāśete ।। and ĪPVV II 62, ll. 19-20:
nanu māyākr̥tavicchedāv iti yad uktaṁ, tena bhagavata eva māyāyogāt
mālinyaṁ syāt ।

51 Though Torella had given the reading -ābhāsasyaikaparidr̥śyamāna- in
Torella 2007d, he kindly informed me (personal communication, 19 August
2013) that his manuscript did have the reading
-ābhāsakramasyaikaparidr̥śyamāna-. In fact, Abhinavagupta seems to have
the reading -ābhāsakramasyaikaparidr̥śyamāna- instead of
-ābhāsasyaikaparidr̥śyamāna-. See ĪPVV II 82: tam avatārayati atha matam
iti । etat cet ity asya vyākhyānaṁ bhāvisūtrārthaparyantasparśi
vyākhyeyam । vicitraśabdena tattad iti vyākhyātam, kramaśabdena
ākasmikatvam ।

52 See ĪPK1.1.2-3: kartari jñātari svātmany ādisiddhe maheśvare ।
ajaḍātmā niṣedhaṁ vā siddhiṁ vā vidadhīta kaḥ ।। kiṁtu mohavaśād asmin
dr̥ṣṭe ’py anupalakṣite । śaktyāviṣkaraṇeneyaṁ pratyabhijñopadarśyate ।।

53 See ĪPV I 20: pratyabhijñā ca bhātabhāsamānarūpā-nusaṁdhān-ātmikā ।

54 See ĪPVV I 113: ātmanaḥ ityādinā dharmiṇaṁ hetuṁ vyavahāryatvena
sādhyaṁ ca bruvatā padatrayeṇa siddhāntimataṁ pūrvapakṣavādī dūṣaṇāya
saṁkṣepeṇa anubhāṣate । ātmaiva tu ityādinā pūrvapakṣī svamataṁ
sārdhaślokoktaṁ saṁkṣipya darśayati । tuśabdaḥ svapakṣasya viśeṣaṁ
dyotayann upapannatāṁ dhvanayan siddhāntimatasya dūṣyamāṇatvaṁ sūcayati
। siddhāntī khalu anupalabdher asiddhatāṁ brūyād ity āśaṅkya yam
ardhaślokaṁ brūte, tasya arthaṁ saṁkṣepeṇa āha ahaṁpratyayenāpi ityādinā
। ādiśabdena indriyaprāṇajñānādisaṁtānasya saṁgrahaḥ । ity āha iti
etadvastu ślokadvayena āhety arthaḥ । katham । ākṣipan ākṣepeṇa lakṣitā
vacanakriyā iyam iti yāvat । anena nanuśabdasya ākṣepadyotakatā
vyākhyātā । ākṣepeṇa ca pūrvapakṣī yuktividagdhaṁmanyatākrāntahr̥dayo
’tra vipratipanno yatnena svābhiniveśāt
saujanyāṅgīkr̥taparopakāraprāvaṇyena siddhāntinā nivartyate iti sūcayann
ajñasasaṁśayau daṇḍāpūpikayaiva iha vyutpādyete iti darśayati

55 See ĪPV I 54: nanu iti ākṣepe ।

56 See ĪPV I 56-57: tan na, yato dvayam api etad avikalpetararūpaṁ na
anyasya kasyacit etadatiriktasya draṣṭuḥ anubhavituḥ saṁbandhi ।

57 See ĪPK1.2.4cd: smr̥tiḥ kenātha yatraivānubhavas tatpadaiva sā ।।

58 See ĪPVV I 126: ṭīkākāraḥ atha yatraiva ityādeḥ yady evam ityantasya
sūtrasya tātparyaṁ pūrvārtha ityādinā viṣayavattābhiṣṭau ityantena
ākhyāya ko ’rthaḥ ityāder āha ātmopagamo vyarthaḥ itiśabdena
antargaḍuśabdasya vyarthaḥ ityanena ko ’rthaḥ ity asya ।
arthāvabhāsakr̥tā vāsanā saṁskārarūpā yasya ātmano
’ntarmukhabodharūpasya, sa yadā tādr̥śadarśanakr̥tavāsanāprabodhadvāreṇa
prabodhito bhavati ।

59 See ĪPVV I 130-31: tasmāt saṁskārasya āśraya ekaḥ, ekatvādeva ca
sthiro yaḥ; sa eva ātmeti pūrvapakṣavādino matam āśaṅkya kārikāṁ
saṁkṣepeṇa vyācaṣṭe pūrvakārikārtham eva upajīvan tad evam iti । yato
nitya ātmā ato yathā asāv anuditasaṁskāro ’pi na smr̥tau vyāpariṣṭa;
tathā uditasaṁskāro ’pi na vyāpriyeta tatsvarūpasya aṁśenāpi
availakṣaṇyāt । vailakṣaṇyaṁ hi saṁskāra eva, tatkr̥te vā
vyatirekarāhitye tasya pūrvarūpāpāyādanityatvam । vyatirikte tu tasya na
tat kiṁcit syāt । tataḥ saṁskārasya kim āśrayeṇa smr̥tau janyāyām
anupayukteneti mātrapadam । ubhayam apīha kalpanārūpaṁ kevalaṁ
pūrvasiddhatvād ekaṁ sūtre upamānatvena uktam ity āśayena āha draṣṭāyaṁ
smartā ca iti ।

60 The full text of this footnote is from the Nr̥pativārtikaṭῑkā. See ŚD
21, fn. 3: avigalitasvarūpasatattvasyaiva bhāvasya
dharmakalparūpāntaracchāyādhāraṇaṁ ghaṭasyevodakāharaṇaṁ caitrasyeva
gamanaṁ vr̥ttir ucyate । tathā tadvr̥ttibhedān na vr̥ttibhedo bhavati
tenaiva rūpeṇābādhitapratyabhijñāviṣayatvāt ।

61 See ĪPVV I 133: tatra prathamam ajaḍarūpatve jñānaṁ siddhāntino na
upapadyate iti yat sūtreṇa ucyate, tat saṁkṣepeṇa avatārayati ātmanaḥ
iti । sūtre anityam iti prādhānyād upāttaṁ dharmāntarāṇy api
vailakṣaṇyakārīṇi upalakṣayatīty āśayena dvitvavikalpeneti sāmānyena āha
। ātmāpi citsvabhāvo jñānam api, tato dvitvena anyatvena
nityatvānityatvalakṣaṇena dharmadharmibhāvena ca yā kalpanā kr̥tā, sā
anupapannā, pramāṇamūlatvābhāvāt na vastusādhanītyetadvastu āha

62 See ĪPVV I 145: asya arthaṁ saṁkṣepeṇa ṭīkākāro vyācaṣṭe sāṁkhyo ’yam
api iti । samyak khyātiḥ prakr̥tipuruṣayorvivekena, saṁkhyānaṁ ca
parigaṇanaṁ tattvabhedānāṁ saṁkhyā; tad adhikr̥tya kr̥to granthaḥ sāṁkhyaḥ
। tatra buddhitattvasya vr̥ttir jñānam uktam । vartanaṁ vr̥ttiḥ
pariṇāmaviśeṣaḥ । pūrvarūpaṁ hi tirodadhat kaścit pariṇāmaḥ
kāṣṭhabhasmavat, sa kāryapariṇāma ucyate; yas tu atirodadhat, sa
dharmapariṇāmo yaḥ siddhākāratayā bhāti suvarṇasyeva kuṇḍalatā; yas tu
atirodadhat sādhyākāratvena gacchati budhyate iti yathā, sa
vr̥ttipariṇāmaḥ । tathā hi vartanaṁ tasyeva tatheti vr̥ttir ucyate ।
pūrvavad eva iti cidbhāgadvāreṇa nityatādidūṣaṇam, jaḍabhāgadiśā
viṣayavyavasthānāyogaḥ iti ।

63 See ŚD 21, fn. 3: avigalitasvarūpasatattvasyaiva bhāvasya
dharmakalparūpāntaracchāyādhāraṇaṁ ghaṭasyevodakāharaṇaṁ caitrasyeva
gamanaṁ vr̥ttir ucyate । tathā tadvr̥ttibhedānna vr̥ttibhedo bhavati
tenaiva rūpeṇābādhitapratyabhijñāviṣayatvāt ।

64 See ĪPVr̥ 1.3.5: adhyavasāya eva bhrāntyā viṣayavyavasthāpako na tu
svasaṁvit, sa ca jaḍaḥ katham arthavyavasthāyā hetuḥ । cidrūpo ’py
atītārthamātram ābhāsayed abāhyasvātmollekhamātraprakāśo vā na taddhetuḥ
।।5।।

65 See ĪPV I 102, fn. 21: nanu kenaivam uktaṁ - jaḍo ’dhyavasāyaḥ
saṁvitsvabhāvo hy asau jñānāvyatirekāt ity āha tata ityādi । nijaṁ ca
ullekhaś ca dvandvaḥ । niṣṭhād iti lyablope pañcamī । tataḥ
smr̥tyadhyavasāyata iti ।

66 See ĪPVV I 253-54: tathā vr̥ttiḥ svātmamātra iti । atra hetur
anantaropapādito nyāyaḥ । tena hi nyāyena kiṁ kr̥tam iti । āha
svarūpamātra iti । iyatā prathamaṁ kārikārdhaṁ vyākhyātam, dvitīyaṁ
vyācaṣṭe tataś ca iti । tataḥ parajñānaviṣayasvīkārābhāvāc ca arthinām
arthakriyālābhaḥ pravr̥ttipūrvako na syād arthitāyā eva anudayāt । sā hi
pravr̥ttiviṣayasya prārthanīyasya arthaviśeṣasya niścaye sati bhavati ।
prārthanīyaś ca ittham artho bhavati yadi sa pūrvaṁ sukhasādhanatvena
dr̥ṣṭa iti niścayaḥ । evaṁ ca viṣayasaṁmelanātmā niścayaḥ
prārthanākāraṇaṁ, tat nāstīti kāraṇānupalabdhyā prārthanāyā abhāve
tayaiva uttarottarakāryāṇām abhāvaḥ iti
prārthanādhyavasāyapravr̥ttiprāptihānādānasaṁvyavahārādir lokayātrā
utsīdet । kramopajātasya saṁvitprabandhasya vicitraṁ kr̥tvā
saṁyojanaviyojanādinā bahuprakāreṇa vaicitryeṇa yat kasmiṁścit viṣaye
melanaṁ – yas tvayā adya viṣayo dr̥śyate, sa pūrvam api mayā ittham
avalokitaḥ ityevaṁrūpaṁ; tena kila tatsamarthācaraṇaṁ pravr̥ttiviṣayasya
arthaviśeṣasya niścaye kriyeta । tad eva tu na ghaṭate । anena
anusaṁdhānajanmā iti vyākhyātam ।

5

Utpala’s Insights into Aesthetics and

His Impact on Abhinavagupta’s

Aesthetic Speculation*

Navjivan Rastogi

Utpala is reckoned as a philosopher, a metaphysician, a devotee but not
an art theoretician, nor an art critic, nor a literary genius. He also
does not dwell directly on any matter aesthetic. So I owe an apology to
the discerning readers for choosing this topic.

Let me admit that in choosing this topic I am inspired by my teacher
K.C. Pandey who specially pinpoints Utpala’s impact on Abhinavagupta and
his teachers1 and makes numerous allusions to Utpala’s formative
insights and contribution in the domain of aesthetics and arts.2 Pandey
remembers him as a probable commentator of the Nāṭyaśāstra or of some
part of it, in any case as an authority on music. He specially takes
note of Abhinavagupta’s conceptualization of vimarśa in terms of
camatkāra expanded in his commentary on Utpala’s Vivr̥ti on three of the
latter’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-kārikās (ĪPK 1.5.11, 13; 2.3.8) being the
underlining aestheticizing principle; notices the interconnection
between vikalpahāna (loss/diminution of logical constructs) and the
kathartic experience in drama towards occasioning universalization;
unearths affinity between the metaphysical notion of pratibhā as
maheśvara and the aesthetic notion of creativity and artistic
sensitivity. Even prior to Pandey, though it came to my notice later,
Kane3 referred to the direct influence of Utpala on the figure of speech
called ullekha (representation). Working for my paper on camatkāra in
19884 I found that Gnoli also referred to the aesthetical significance
of the notion of camatkāra crediting its first technical use to Utpala5
while tracing its conceptual evolution and discussing it against the
background of its Western parallels. Raghavan constitutes another source
of inspiration. While alluding to the authors quoted in the
Abhinavabhāratī, he revisits Pandey’s references using additional
sources buttressing a credible hypothesis of Utpala’s having attempted a
work on music interpreting therein certain sections from Bharata’s
text.6 Mukund Lath7 records Utpala’s views on indispensability of
certain notes in gāndharva music and his difference from the later-day
musicians such as Kallinātha, the author of the Kalānidhi, commentary on
the Saṅgīta-Ratnākara of Śārṅgadeva. Lath even translates a relevant
passage from the Abhinavabhāratī.

While sifting through the original accounts one might be tempted to
examine the hypothetical possibility of Utpala’s being a grand-teacher
of Abhinava in the sphere of aesthetics as well. Utpala was Abhinava’s
grand-teacher in Pratyabhijñā, i.e. the teacher of his teacher
Lakṣmaṇagupta. However, Abhinavagupta employs the title of paramaguru
for Utpala even in former’s works on dramaturgy and poetics. Apparently
there ought to be no incongruity in doing so, but given the fact that
Abhinavagupta was endowed with an acute sense of history with an eye on
precision and also that he learnt different disciplines from an
exclusive set of teachers, this is likely to cause some confusion.
Perhaps this could be the reason why Uttuṅgodaya, the Keralite author of
the Kaumudī commentary on Abhinavagupta’s Locana, takes Utpala as the
teacher of Bhaṭṭendurāja, Abhinavagupta’s teacher in the Dhvanyāloka.8
This ascription might be questioned on the ground that Uttuṅgodaya is
glossing Abhinavagupta’s statement in the context of a citation from a
Pratyabhijñā text.9 However, in another context, Abhinavagupta cites the
explanation offered by his grand-teacher Utpaladeva and also notes his
differences from him.10 Now, this is not a Pratyabhijñā context, but a
situation where grand-teacher and grand-pupil are holding divergent
views. Utpala could have been Abhinavagupta’s grand-teacher in a
dramaturgic or specifically a musicological context through his teacher
Bhaṭṭa Tauta. In that eventuality one could possibly suspect that Utpala
could have been his teacher’s teacher, that is the teacher of Bhaṭṭa
Tauta. Nevertheless we cannot draw definite conclusion from such a
slender evidence as to whether the epithet paramaguru has extended
implications beyond Pratyabhijñā. But there is not even an iota of doubt
that Utpala cast strong impact on Abhinavagupta’s opinions in the domain
of music. In the absence of any contrary information to this day, it
appears fair to go with Raghavan who on the authority of Basavarāja,
author of the Śivatattva-Ratnākara, tends to believe that Utpala
possibly wrote a work on music and was recognized as an authority.11
Nevertheless the fact that our only direct source of access to Utpala’s
music connection is Abhinavagupta’s Abhinavabhāratī underscores some
kind of intra-systemal bond between the two.

The other factor that ignited my interest is the immensely aesthetical
character of the speculative tradition in which Utpala is born.
Notwithstanding the characterization by Northrop and Jung of the entire
Eastern thought as being predominantly aesthetic vis-à-vis Western as
rational, Utpala’s own tradition in the overall context of Indian
thought displays a unique and unmatched aesthetical bias with the sole
exception of the later-day philosophical school of Caitanya. Utpala’s
thought seminally goes back to Bhartr̥hari. As Torella has very ably
shown and I have also noted elsewhere about Utpala’s absolutely opposite
valuation of Bhartr̥hari from his master’s,12 Bhartr̥hari univocally holds
word-essence as forming the genesis of all sciences, crafts and art.13

Preceding Utpala, in his home ground, one has the Vijñāna-Bhairava
advocating the emergence of extreme joy from complete absorption into a
song or other sensory relishings;14 the Śivasūtra envisioning a complete
metaphor of a stage-presentation portraying the self as an actor,
embodied self as the stage, cognition-senses as the savouring
spectators;15 the Spanda-Kārikā projecting the world as the sport or
playful activity of the yogin or consciousness16 reminding Bharata’s
description of the drama as a plaything, toy (krīḍanīyaka).17 Again the
Stava-Cintāmaṇi is found offering a complete imagery of a dramatic
enactment passing through all its developmental stages or that of a
portrait by an artist,18 and his own teacher Somānanda picturing the
ultimate reality as embodying flashing joyous consciousness
(sphuran-nirvr̥ta-cidvapuḥ) or pure beatitude in the nature of
consciousness (cidrūpāhlādaparamaḥ [conscious beatitude: Torella])
marking the source of whole creation which is but an expansion of His
form or beauty, rendering beauty as a necessary condition of being.19

In all these sources one thing is strikingly common and constant that
the whole creation as well as creativity is essentially in the nature of
rasa — rasa is the basic paradigm — symbolizing a fluid state of
uninterrupted flow of consciousness characterized by joy, relish and
beatitude. Notwithstanding some faint voices in the hoary Vedic
antiquity, this kind of pervasive systemal perception is qualitatively
unique in the history of Indian thought. Being a repository of such a
joyous tradition as well as the progenitor of a school of thought that
re-defined the aesthetic consciousness of succeeding academia under the
tutelage of his grand-pupil Abhinava, the curiosity to look for its
roots in Utpala’s writings does seem to make a reasonable sense.

This much for the background rationale. In formulating my opinions
Utpala’s ĪPK, ĪPVr̥, ĪPViv (as found in ĪPVV) and ŚDVr̥tti have been my
mainstay. Besides, the ŚSĀ, ABh and Locana have been quite useful.
However, the most important text has been Abhinavagupta’s ĪPVV without
which it would have been impossible to reach out to several ingenuous
insights of Utpala in the Vivr̥ti, Vr̥tti or even Kārikā (i.e. ĪPK).

The methodology adopted is partly anthological and compilatory, partly
hermeneutical and partly reconstructive. Utpala’s beauty-consciousness
has flown through two outlets namely, religious and secular. It is the
latter that we intend to mostly focus on20 — this, despite the fact that
the basic undercurrent that essentially remains spiritual and religious,
provides the requisite framework for the secular to flourish expressed
through a shared fraternity of imagery and metaphors such as dance,
drama, actor/artist, song, juice/tasty drink or concoction, sport,
savouring and painting. We first take up Utpala’s philosophical
observations regarding the issues that concern beauty and art experience
followed by his inputs on independent arts such as dance, drama, poetics
and music.

Integral Vision as an Aesthetic Process:

Bhakti Is Philosophy’s Beauty Apperception

Pursuit of aesthetics distinguishes itself from the pursuit of
philosophy, because it lays greater emphasis on consciousness as feeling
as compared to the philosophy’s emphasis on consciousness as knowing, to
borrow the parlance of a great Indian thinker of our times, K.C.
Bhattacharya,21 implying that reality could also be realized through
feeling or empathy and not by gnosis alone. This perhaps explains why
the soteriological experience is modelled on art experience. If we look
at his ŚSĀ, Utpala seems to be fully absorbed in celebrating the joyous
world-view of Kashmir Śaivism — its USP, to use a current marketing
jargon. The joyful outlook succeeds in not only consecrating life with
meaningfulness, it also soaks the spiritual journey and the
soteriological realization with the elixir of joy. As a logical
corollary the structural environ of the Śaivite non-dualistic devotion
(bhakti), i.e. religious beauty apperception, offers a powerfully cogent
background towards fuller appreciation of beauty experience, rasa
experience and art experience. The overwhelming pursuit of joy and its
fruition is seen present in so many contexts that its centrality simply
baffles us viewing phenomenal world as the sport or play of the Lord,
repeatedly treating the whole process of praying or worshipping as a
grand festival, ongoing recourse to the metaphors of incessant downpour
of rain, placid waters of a tranquil pond, intoxicating drink, wine,
juice and nectar as a vehicle of transmission of joyous feeling,
continual allusion to the creative beauty-drenched modes of art wrought
by artist, actor and poet, the rasa-nature of religious experience (i.e.
bhakti) and therethrough its essential character as bliss and
transcendental relish keep on building up an all round ambience of
creative rejoicing. It is in this context that Utpala’s description of
the Lord, the Ultimate Reality, as “exceedingly beautiful”
(atisundara)22 or “sole charming principle” (lalita)23 is immensely
befitting. The special significance of this description lies in the fact
that this is perhaps the first time in the history of Indian philosophy
that reality is reckoned in terms of beauty by an otherwise rigorously
gnostic system.24

This overarching notion of joy and beauty leads to elevation of bhakti
as an aesthetic sentiment (rasa)25 on its own accord as well as the
metasentiment (mahārasa)26 being the matrix of all the aesthetic
sentiments thus discharging the double role of rasa and mahārasa both,
so to say. However, such a situation indicates two conflicting
valuations of bhakti between poetics/dramaturgy and philosophy both
claiming allegiance to the Trika proper. Significantly enough, Utpala
begins his ĪPK with rendering servitude to Maheśvara in terms of
recognition. That is, by equation between dāsya-bhakti (devotion in the
master–servant relationship mode) and pratyabhijñā Utpala removes the
gap between perception through feeling/emotion and perception through
knowing/gnosis.27 If we go by Abhinavagupta, Utpala declares that
emotions too can lead to knowledge. The taste one gets in integral
vision constitutes joy in terms of emotion, devotion in terms of
complete absorption (samāveśa) and liberation in terms of gnosis.28 Not
only here, Utpala makes a direct reference by proper name to his
remaining drenched in constant ecstasy, intoxicated as he was with
devotion.29 Kṣemarāja, his commentator and great grand-pupil, specially
highlights this aspect.30 According to Gopinath Kaviraj, the
Pratyabhijñā theoreticians by enunciating servitude have, as it were,
clinched the basic secret of the rasa-hood of bhakti.31 Utpala, in close
agreement with Bhaṭṭa Nārāyaṇa, takes us to two stages of bhakti. The
first is the emerging state of devotion (sphuraṇāvasthā) unflinching
faith being its distinctive mark. The next is the perfected or fully
developed state (prarūḍhāvasthā), its mark is total self-surrender and
absolute identity. They might be named as śānta-bhakti (tranquil/serene
devotion) and dāsya-bhakti (servitude devotion) respectively. No sooner
śānta comes into being, it gets coloured by dāsya. This demarcation
between the two will be found germane to our upcoming discussion.

It sounds somewhat strange that poeticians not only disagree with the
Śaiva monists who unanimously subscribe to the rasa character of bhakti,
but there is also lack of unanimity among themselves. In
pre-Abhinavagupta recensions of the NŚ only eight poetic sentiments are
mentioned, śānta rasa (sentiment of quietude) does not figure there. The
issue of bhakti being a rasa simply does not arise. The Gaekwad edition
of the NŚ used with the ABh does have a recension which mentions śānta
as a ninth dramatic sentiment. Some scholars therefore tend to suspect
this portion to be an interpolation. The important thing that one finds
here is that all the eight sentiments are derivatives/modifications
(vikr̥ti) and śānta is their genesis/prototype (prakr̥ti). Owing to their
respective efficient causal factors they come into being and merge back
in their sources once these factors wither away from the scene. The
other point to be noted is that śānta is employed for the purpose of
attaining salvation (mokṣa).32 Abhinavagupta defines śama (peace), the
enduring emotion of śānta rasa, as “knowledge of truth in the nature of
self ” (ātmasvarūpaṁ tattvajñānaṁ)33 and delves into an exhaustive
discussion as regards determinants, consequents,34 etc. However, the
most pertinent observation that Abhinavagupta makes is that he does not
consider bhakti and śraddhā (devotion and reverence) as independent
rasas, at the most they could be viewed as ancillaries of śānta.35 This
does not accord well with the stand taken by Utpala philosophically.
Bhakti represents compulsive relishing arising from total absorption in
the divine beatitude, whereas śraddhā happens to be pre-relishing
tendency towards mastering the same.36 In philosophy bhakti is rasa by
itself, metasentiment (mahārasa) at that, and constitutes matrix
(prakr̥ti) of all rasas, rendering even śānta as its subsidiary. The
poetician Mammaṭa echoes Abhinavagupta by upholding nine rasas in
poetics: śānto’pi navamaḥ rasaḥ, but discards rasa-hood of bhakti.
Mammaṭa goes on to propound one more distinction that bhakti is not
subsidiary of śānta, but that of rati (love, the enduring emotion of
śr̥ṅgāra, the erotic sentiment) and belongs technically to the category
of bhāva. However, Kaviraj perceives it differently. According to him,
in poetics/rhetorics bhakti proper, that is primary, comes under śānta
rasa and it is secondary bhakti that is considered only bhāva.37 But in
the domain of bhakti discipline śānta rasa itself is a special kind of
bhakti and the bhakti proper or primary bhakti is of the nature of rasa
alone.38

Kaviraj is convinced that Utpala’s conceptualizing bhakti as dāsya opens
the floodgates for the synthesis of the respective perceptions of bhakti
in philosophy and poetics/dramaturgy and feels that Abhinavagupta’s
treatment of rasa in the ABh has been profoundly impacted by the
philosophical notion of bhakti.39 Because rasa experience is nothing but
rapturous relishing of perfect I-hood (pūrṇāhaṁtā-camatkāra) and ditto
is the case with bhakti. The seemingly two differing approaches — one
holding śānta rasa as being the knowledge-of-truth-centric
(tattvajñāna-pradhāna) as found in poetics/dramaturgy and the other
finding the meta-aesthetic relishing of the unity of consciousness and
joy (cid-ānanda-ātmaikya-āsvāda-pradhāna) being central to the notion of
dāsya as is the wont of philosophy — both emerge from the rasa essence
of bhakti. What is more, thanks to the underlying unity, attachment,
malice, pain, misery, self-conceit, all these states of mind (bhāva),
which appear mutually conflicting, ultimately get manifested as
instances of the Divine, dense in bliss, and thereby becoming relishable
as multiple modes of the blissful consciousness elicit a resonating
analogue in the aesthetic savouring of (the negative mental states such
as) grief, fear, fury when reduced to the condition of rasa (emerging as
sentiments of sorrow, horror, furiousness: karuṇa, bhayānaka, raudra) in
the domain of art. Perhaps it may look quite far-fetched to consider the
suggested pun and interpret the word nava (new) in the phrase
navarasārdrārdra40 (lit. repeatedly moistened by the ever new relish),
employed by Utpala, in the sense of number “nine” as well, veiledly
implying thereby Utpala’s intention to uphold the independent rasa
status of bhakti as the ninth rasa or mahārasa laying the metaphysical
foundation for the independent rasa status of śānta whose centrality has
been so passionately advocated by his grand-pupil Abhinavagupta in
dramaturgy and poetics.

Contextualization of Aesthetics within

Trika Ontology: Situating Aesthetics

under Vimala Vyavahāra

Utpala’s some of metaphysical stipulations seem to have gone long way to
have cast profound formative influence on the aesthetical speculation of
posterity. One of the foremost problems is how and where to situate
aesthetics, art experience, art object, art creation and art
appreciation, all included ontologically within the Trika metaphysics.
Utpala would, without hesitation, place it under the rubric of vimala
vyavahāra (pure worldly transaction). He says:

Thus ordinary worldly transaction, whether pure or impure, is
experienced as resting on the Lord inlaid (khacita) with (or, coloured
by) the manifestations of objects very different from one another.41

In the Vr̥tti, Utpala makes it clear that the whole human activity is
based on duality and this activity could be of two types — sullied, i.e.
impure (malina), and clean or pure (śuddha). The former relates to those
who are blinded by ignorance because of māyā and the latter to those who
are in the know of reality as such. To it Utpala further adds: that all
this transactional behaviour is grounded in the Lord is always certified
by one’s immediate experience.42 It remains for Abhinavagupta to bring
out the inherent import of Utpala’s pronouncement. Under the twofold
categorization of ordinary transactions of human life — general and
particular,43 and then subjecting them to their qualitative
classification — pure and impure, proposed by Utpala, Abhinavagupta is
prone to label “aesthetical” transaction as ‘a particular human
transaction of the pure category’.44

In developing Utpala’s thesis Abhinavagupta comes out with five relevant
sub-formulations.

One: The impure particular transaction relates to sheer mundane
activities such as sales, purchase, quarrel, etc. whereas the pure
particular transaction represents all academic, intellectual, cultural,
spiritual and religious activities such as teaching, initiation, ritual
and ceremonial praxis, meditation, total self-absorption (samādhāna), et
al. (ādi). The terminal ādi (et al.) is quite pregnant.

Two: The pure particular transaction too belongs to those who have
recognized their self-identity and is the exclusive prerogative of the
followers of the “special discipline” (viśeṣadr̥ṣṭi: i.e. the school
Abhinavagupta belonged to) thereby obliquely hinting at his tradition’s
special closeness to these activities.

Three: Though the transactional character of the pure activities
continues to persist since māyic operation is not withdrawn, because of
its configurational structure enlivened by unity–diversity, the
transactional character disappears (tirodhīyate) on vanishing of
duality.

Four: It is in this sense that this transaction, despite consisting in
exchange or interaction between self and other/s, could be appropriately
called pure, free from impurity, in proportion to the extent of their
recognizing the supreme Self.

Five: There are twin parameters for determining purity or freedom from
impurity, to be more precise, e.g.:

i. purification or refinement of impurity, and

ii. compact density of consciousness.45

Abhinavagupta fully utilizes the opportunity to develop full potential
of Utpala’s thesis by taking direct cues from him. Utpala himself
glosses anubhūyate from the Kārikā as saṁbhāvyate ’nubhavena in the
Vr̥tti. Further glossing tathājñāninām […]saṁbhāvyate from the Vr̥tti and
kevalaṁ as well as the probable phrase siddhādiḥ from the Vivr̥ti46
Abhinavagupta underscores his master’s enunciation of the possibility of
purity, absence of defilement arising from the pursuit of intellectual,
spiritual and cultural transactions leading to the perception that the
Lord is the final ground of all transactions even when one is unable to
cast off his dualizing consciousness fully.47 Abhinavagupta connects
Utpala’s thesis with the doctrine of viśeṣa (difference, distinction,
surplus, excess, addition) envisaged in the Vijñāna-Bhairava and
formulated as “attentiveness in relationship represented by the
knower–known apperception”.48 Abhinavagupta reminds us of this
connection in the Vimarśinī also.49 Abhinavagupta formulates this viśeṣa
as adhika (additional, transcending, more). What is striking is that
Abhinavagupta talks of this adhikā pratipatti applicable in case of a
qualified aesthete in the Abhinavabhāratī while introducing his own
theory of rasa.50

The reason behind this rather long engagement with Utpala’s ontological
positioning of the aesthetic dimension of human transaction and his
several supplemental insights filtered through Abhinavagupta’s
interpretation such as the notions of absence of impurity,
unity–diversity structure of human transactions, potential for
“more”-ness, that is attentiveness in relation as a tool for
value-transformation, all woven together is to show how Utpala offers an
inclusive framework that substantially creates space for determining the
nature of aesthetic experience, particularly as represented by rasa, the
unity–diversity dynamics of rasa-generation as a process, the suggested
poetic meaning in terms of recognition, and the role of manaskāra
(mental attentiveness) underlining the process of beauty apperception.
In the following lines these issues come up for discussion as per demand
of the context.

Relishing Freedom and Self-awareness:

Paradigmatic Model of Spotless Human Activity of Art:

Sourced to Mohāpasāraṇa and Pratyabhijñāna

Through his doctrine of nirmala-vyavahāra (spotless transactions of
life) Utpala takes us to his two presuppositional paradigms consisting
of removal of stupor (mohāpasāraṇa) and recogniton (pratyabhijñāna). In
ĪPK 2.3.1751 he sources this nirmala vyavahāra to the disclosure of
powers (śaktiprakāśa: “bringing to light of the powers”) and in 1.1.352
recognition of self-identity to the discovery of powers
(śaktyāviṣkaraṇa). The two, disclosure (śaktiprakāśa) as well as
discovery of one’s innate powers (śaktyāviṣkaraṇa), are synchronous with
the removal of stupor, ignorance or veil. In Book Three, i.e. section on
Āgama of his ĪPK, Utpala equates mala (impurity) with moha (stupor,
blinding ignorance). In his typical diction impurity is either the loss
of freedom of one’s self-awareness or the loss of awareness of one’s
innate freedom.53 Thus nirmalatā (immaculate, stain-free state) of
vyavahāra implies such activity in the domain of practical life as
ensures complete enjoyment of one’s essential being consisting in
freedom and self-awareness. This is precisely the paradigmatic model in
which the spotless human activity that is centred on beauty in and
through art also operates.

Besides anugraha, the Sanskrit word for divine favour is prasāda, which
is amenable to be translated variously depending upon the context such
as grace, favour, purity, clarity, pelucidity and perspicuity. In the
ŚSĀ Utpala is constantly striving for the dispensing of grace (prasāda)
by the Lord.54 Abhinavagupta interprets this prasāda as immaculation or
absence of impurity,55 which he again conceives as that state of divine
essence where Śiva is shining in his total glory.56 There are two
dimensions to this freedom from impurity: substantive and processive. In
the former, i.e. substantive, it represents the luminosity aspect of
Paramaśiva who is regarded as the unity of prakāśa and vimarśa. In the
benedictory verse of the Vivr̥ti, Utpala bows to Śiva who is possessed of
unbroken, unobscured and immaculate mode of being.57Abhinavagupta offers
a lengthy exegesis of Utpala’s verse, but for us what matters is that
while connecting svaccha (lit. very clean, crystal clear, transparent)
with prakāśa and svacchanda (lit. self-willed, self-dependent,
self-driven) with dynamism of vimarśa, Abhinavagupta emphasizes the
“self-exceeding” aspect of purity without inducing any change or excess
within the intrinsic essence of reality58 and thus allowing it to
translate into self-extension, self-outgrowth, by way of creation. The
reference already made earlier to this “excess” is slightly on a
different note. The nirmalatā-vyavahāra may be rationalized as having
two components. In ĪPK 1.5.15-16, Utpala makes it abundantly clear that
freedom-from-impurity (nirmalatā) component may be linked to prakāśa as
its source and the vyavahāra component to svātantrya.59 Thus throughout
his ĪPK Utpala is intent upon showing the internal and external forms of
the Absolutic agency in terms of this binary modality itself and taking
recourse to this very vocabulary establishes the autonomous agenthood of
the Lord in its totality reducing every form of creation in the mould of
externalization of the internal.60 As regards the latter, i.e.
processive dimension, freedom from impurity constitutes the whole
process of eradicating dirt, defilement, delusion or negativity from
mind.61 That the emphasis on the processive side was very much in the
mind of Utpala is clear from his construction in the Vivrt̥i of the word
nirantara (constant, incessant) used by himself in the Vr̥tti. For him
continuity means purity of concentric attention characterized by the
absolute lack of heterogeneous mental activity (vyavahāra).62 This idea
gets fully reflected or aesthetically reconstrued when aesthetic
experience is formulated as aesthetic relish in the nature of unimpeded
or unobstructed awareness (alaukikanirvighnasaṁvedanā or
vītavighnapratīti) and the whole operation behind rasa-production as the
process and mechanism of the removal of the barriers and impediments in
the way of rasa-realization. On the similar lines the fitness of an
appreciative reader or viewer is determined by the extent his
appreciative genius is free from the defiling elements
(vimalapratibhānaśālihr̥dayaḥ). We will see more of it later. In the
domain of epistemology it emerges as the Pratyabhijñā definition of
pramāṇa, whereas in the emotive or psychic sphere it paves way for
effecting pleasant disposition, poise, lucidity, elevation or
sublimation of mind. Sublimation of mind or ego means moving from
impurity or limited purity towards complete or absolute purity. One of
the three literary guṇas (basic qualities), prasāda is notionally very
close to and in a sense may be said to have been inspired by the Śaiva
de-impurity thesis. Prasāda is a guṇa that is common to all rasas and
represents lucidity of language and perspicuity or cleanliness of style
implying instantaneous conveyance and comprehension of poetic meaning.
Mammaṭa compares this meaning with fire from dry fuel or reflection in
clear water.63

It is interesting to see that these two basic parameters mohāpasāraṇa
(eradicating stupor) and pratyabhijñana (re-knowing), are duly
propounded by Utpala in a single kārikā, i.e. ĪPK 1.1.364 as
constituting two sides of the same process. Recognition through
discovery of innate faculties is tantamount to eradication of delusion
supposed to be solely responsible for failure in identification even on
perception. We have already seen interconnection between the ideas of
experience or awareness devoid of obstacles, luminosity of consciousness
and removal of delusion.65 Similarly Utpala demonstrates
innerconnectivity through the ideas of recognition, self-affirming
ideation, rapturous self-savouring and the understanding that directly
enters the heart.66 Through an ingenuous employment of the two
expressions “perception” and “noticing/marking” (darśana and upalakṣaṇa
[the latter also construed as vīkṣaṇa, vide ĪPK 4.1.17, “close
perception, noticing”]) Utpala implicatively anticipates these twin
notions of delusion–elimination and recognition, and thereby proposes a
series of nuances of pratyabhijñāna extensively relied upon by the later
aestheticians. Let it be clearly understood that presently my allusion
to recognition is art specific. To my knowledge, Utpala employs the word
pratyabhijñā in four senses: (i) knowing in the form of unflinching
certitude;67 (ii) full or complete knowledge (parijñāna,68 lit. pari
“full, whole, from all sides”; jñāna “knowledge”) in the sense of
infinitization (aparimitīkaraṇa); (iii) revealing (prakāśana)69 in the
sense of making a hitherto unknown thing known hence alternatively
construed as jñāpana; and (iv) careful focused consideration or
specially analysing inherent meaning (viśeṣataḥ nirūpaṇa) abstracted in
terms of anusaṁdhāna by Abhinavagupta.70

Out of the four, all the senses with the sole exception of the first
could be said to pertain to or have some extent of bearing on the realm
of poetry and art. The second sense, i.e. infinitization, could be
linked to the notion of saṁvid-vikāsa or saṁvid-vaitatya
(consciousness-expansion or consciousness-extension, also alternatively
construed as expanded/extended consciousness). This notion appears to
have provided impetus to the nurturing of the later-day theory of
universalization (sādhāraṇīkaraṇa) so vital to experiencing rasa. The
third meaning, prakāśana (revealing, expressing), could be seen as
pointing to the trans-epistemic nature of communication of the import
from a piece of art. Treading on similar lines with mohāpasāraṇa the
process of art revelation is neither productive nor cognitive, but
suggestively expressive (vyaṅgya), re-creatively recognitive. In the
fourth, i.e. final, sense, it might be seen as nurturing the notion of
“aesthetic chewing” (carvaṇā) and its essentially processive character
(rasanā: sādhyarūpatā) as against its substantivization (siddharūpatā)
in the context of the subsequent theorization of art experience. This
sense of pratyabhijñā as an ongoing recognitive synthesis towards
discovering the precise meaning inherent in the piece of art (or,
technically the medium of art) also could be viewed as lending further
strength to the previous meaning.71

Going forward, ĪPK 1.1.3 continues to remain overwhelmingly important
from our point of view. Utpala seems to exploit enormous semantic
potential of the phrase anupalakṣite (remaining unnoticed/unmarked). In
the Vr̥tti Utpala glosses it by ahr̥dayaṁgamatvād (because of its
inability to enter the heart)72 and thereby rendering anupalakṣite in
the Kārikā, in effect, to read anupalakṣitatvāt.73

Abhinavagupta remains our only source and support for making it possible
to have a peep into the probable and intended direction of Utpala’s line
of thinking. From the long textual extract that appears in the note
below74 the following insights could be directly attributed to Utpala:

1. “Noticing” (upalakṣitatva = hr̥dayaṅgamatva) stands for perception
(darśana) that has reached the state of definitive reflective awareness
(vimarśa = hr̥daya). Only and only then it could lead to a vyavahāra,
otherwise it is as good as a blade of grass on road which, though seen,
remains unnoticed.

2. “Entering into heart” or “reaching the heart” could be defined in
terms of “being reflectively aware”.75

3. “Being reflectively aware” (a) calls for complete absorption by the
experiencing subject (pramātrāveśa), implying that even the appearing of
an object to or shining of an object in the knower’s consciousness is a
subjective act (pramātr̥prakāśabalena) and not a mechanical objective
reflex; (b) implies, in addition, integral grasp or acceptance of object
in all aspects, inherent in the expression “am configuring” (vimr̥śāmi)
that suggests essential identity with the experiencing subject, whereas
the expression “shines” (ābhāsate) refers to only part-grasping;76 (c)
reduces “condition of reaching the heart” (hr̥dayaṅgamatva) to “repose in
heart” (hr̥daya-viśrānti).

4. “Entering into heart” is intrinsically an aesthetic activity turning
the object of perception, which lacked relishability at the initial
moment of bare perception, into an object of relish, resulting from
thorough appreciation of all the essential characterstics of the
objects: “yes, this is its actual form (satyam etadrūpam)”. This
appreciation is accompanied by an implicit mental assurance about its
occurring necessarily within the realm of possibility.77

Having thus positioned himself it is easier for Utpala now to take the
next logical step. By repeating upadarśyate (lit. closely
shown/demonstrated) in the Vr̥tti, Utpala emphatically converts the act
of promised demonstration/showing (i.e. exposition) of recognition of
the Lord (who is the Self through the discovery of His intrinsic
faculties), which on the face of it apparently aims at presenting the
Lord as a part of the practical transaction, into an act of unveiling or
revealing someone with concealed identity as actually being close and
intimate by bringing it to the frontal consciousness due primarily to
heart’s interactive integration.78 In this way a neutral-looking
transactional activity acquires the semblance of a self-transcending
aesthetic activity with heartful participation on the part of subject.
The value of such a stipulation speaks for itself when in the domain of
art criticism we find Bhaṭṭa Nāyaka solicit elimination of delusion
(mohāpasāraṇa) from pre-eminence of sattva (sattvodreka) (being the
necessary precondition for the rise of aesthetic experience)79 in sharp
contrast to Utpala who sees the same accrue from recognition
(pratyabhijñāna). For Utpala recognition is not due to preponderance of
sattva, but due to “discovery through powers” (śaktyāviṣkaraṇa), i.e.
“through evincing mark of recognition constituted by extraordinary
power” (asādhāraṇaprabhāvābhijñānakhyāpana).80

Hr̥dayasaṁgamatva Construed as

Aesthetic Savouring, i.e. Camatkāra

As we tread along the historical growth of Indian aesthetics post Utpala
one can easily pick up the centrality of the notion of hr̥daya and
hr̥dayaṁgamatva. Abhinavan resort to a series of sub-themes of
hr̥dayānupraveśa (penetration into heart), hr̥dayasaṁvāda (resonance
of/with heart), hr̥dayaviśrānti (repose in heart), sahr̥daya (gourmet,
aesthete), sahr̥dayatā (qualification and critical faculty for art
appreciation) and the like would be found to stem from and revolve round
the notion of hr̥dayaṁgamatva enunciated by Utpala. Using hr̥dayaṁgamatva
he glides into the cognate technical notion of camatkāra81 (savouring
act of the subject; lit. “wonderment”). More correctly, he rationalizes
the former in the form of the latter. We have already seen Pandey draw
our attention to Utpala’s thematization of vimarśa as camatkāra and
Gnoli to his first ever deployment of this term philosophically within
the Kashmir Śaivite academia. The aesthetic value of this concept
becomes amply evident when even a lay student sees Abhinavagupta open
his treatment of rasa (aesthetic experience) in terms of camatkāra.
Abhinavagupta offers two primary reductions, viz.:

(i) camatkāra is unimpeded mental awareness represented by dense
uniformity of the spectator’s (or for that matter, connoisseur’s)
perception,82 and

(ii) it is the mental activity of a savouring subject, a gourmet, who is
fully immersed in vibration of the wonderful enjoyment/relish,83

and one secondary abstraction, e.g.:

The physical changes, generated by it, such as trembling, horripilation,
pleasant upward shaking of body or limbs, etc. are also called
camatkāra.84

In the ensuing discussion I will try to examine how far these Abhinavan
deductions are impacted and informed by Utpala’s insights.

On this point the available source material could be divided under two
heads, direct and indirect. The first, i.e. direct, which takes into
account Utpala’s own averments, covers Padasaṁgati, Utpala’s commentary
on the ŚD, ĪPVr̥, ĪPViv and ŚSĀ. The second, i.e. indirect, covers
Abhinavagupta’s comments and observations establishing and clarifying
interconnections and implications in the statements of Utpala.85 Before
proceeding to take stock of the material in hand, it might be
appropriate to make a few general comments.

Utpala’s conceptualization of camatkāra seems to take two directions.
One represents the general aesthetic undercurrent interlacing the entire
thought, be it regarding reality, knowledge, language, religious faith
or any other aspect. This we may describe as ontological or
“existential” camatkāra consisting in joyful valuation of everything as
unabated flow of beatitude. It spells out the general attitude of the
system in distinguishing the Trika perception of all categories as
soaked in rasa (sarasa) from the non-Trika perception which is labelled
as dry (śuṣka). This ontological insight Utpala holds in common with
other savants like Kallaṭa and Somānanda. The only contribution Utpala
makes is that he channelizes the floating idea by giving it a technical
name, i.e. camatkāra, and also by providing supporting metaphysical,
logical, psychological and phenomenological framework. The other
conceptualization may be said to pertain to aesthetics and described as
“experiential” camatkāra. The second type has direct bearing in the
domains of bhakti and art. A careful scrutiny suggests a further
secondary conceptualization under this second variety relating to the
objective, material or physical side of art as well as bhakti. In this
formulation camatkāra touches the medium of art, artefact, i.e. art
object, and the content of beauty rendering all these as varying marks
or stages of camatkāra.

Utpala’s primary inspiration seems to have come from his own teacher,
Somānanda. The word camatkāra is absent in Somānanda, but his āmoda
(lit. joy, delight; also, diffusive fragrance), occurring four times, is
rendered in terms of camatkāra twice,86 of āsvāda (taste) once87 and
once remaining unexplained88 in the Padasaṁgati. Camatkāra is further
construed as tathāsvarūpaparāmarśana (reflecting upon/brooding over or
being reflectively aware of His having such a form).89 Taking into
account Utpala’s alternative formulation in terms of āsvāda, the
intended connection of camatkāra with āsvāda becomes clear. At both the
places, context is similar — whether you call it expansion (jr̥mbhā, lit.
“yawning”) or abundance (bāhulya) (of āmoda) — it consists in Self’s
unfolding in the form of universe. One can notice two distinctive yet
complementary lines taken by Somānanda and Utpala respectively.
Somānanda delineates Śiva, the absolute reality, as joy incarnate
(pramodātmā: lit. of the nature of joy), his experience as entrancement
by own power-savouring (prabhāvāmodabhāvitaḥ),90 his activity as play or
sport (krīḍati)91 and the source of his joyous experience as the flow of
his own beauty, form or (variegated) colour (the three primary senses of
the word rūpa: rūpaprasārarasataḥ).92 As regards Utpala, he has four
points to add: (i) this reflective awareness necessarily has the nature
of transworldly relish or unique savouring, (ii) this represents a
process, an unending current of relish (vibhavāsvādo ’parisamāptaḥ: lit.
unfinished gustation), (iii) play or sport is invariably a vibratory
reflex following joy,93 and (iv) the absolute beauty-apperception
(rūpaparāmarśa) in the form of phenomenal expansion metaphorically
portrayed as “yawning” (jr̥mbhā) which being an outflow of āmoda (i.e.
camatkāra for Utpala), is reconceptualized as ghūrṇana (from √ghūrṇ, to
whirl around, revolve, move, reel) by Utpala who by invoking his other
work, ŚSĀ, explains it as “swaying with his own blissful spontaneity”.94
Perhaps Utpala wants to re-emphasize and draw endorsement from his
teacher that both processes, appreciative as well as creative, are
aesthetic to the core.

In his ŚSĀ Utpala pushes his stand further. The word āmoda which he uses
here only once and which he so fervently reconstructs as camatkāra in
the ŚDVr̥ starts losing its sheen, and going by Kṣemarāja, it now comes
to denote fragrance.95 Though I still believe that contextually its
rendering into camatkāra would have been more apt and closer to Utpala’s
original presentation. From the ŚDVr̥ to ŚSĀ there is a visible change of
context — Utpala transiting from philosophy to theology or devotion, to
be more precise. There are only two occurrences of the word camatkāra.
Out of the two, in the first one,96 which thematically takes us back to
ŚD 1.1, Utpala resorts to the experiential formulation of camatkāra
professedly in terms of savouring. Utpala’s innovation lies in
connecting this savouring (of devotional relish) with the metaphorical
act of chewing/munching (carvaṇā): repeating instantaneously the act of
tasting over and over again for an extended period of time, and thereby
making it a landmark contribution. This is perhaps the first ever
reference to carvaṇā within the academic community of Kashmir Śaivists
and may be accepted as the foundation of Abhinavan theorization of
aesthetic experience in terms of carvaṇā, i.e. aesthetic
chewing/relishing of rasa. The second usage97 marks the existential
formulation of camatkāra. It is due to sheer touch of the divine that a
thing of beauty produces joy — a state of rapturous thrill (camatkr̥ti) —
in the beholder. In this formulation the object too is beautiful and
therefore is capable of causing relish. With such a posture Utpala
brings even all the objective reality within the ontological canvas of
beauty.

However, the most important component of Utpala’s hermeneutics of
camatkāra is found in his seminal Pratyabhijñā texts. Even at the risk
of appearing repetitive I would like to summarize the key points of his
elaborate treatment, specially the complex methodology adopted and major
conclusions drawn before looking into them in detail. From our point of
view ĪPK 1.5.11 and 2.4.20 transpire to be most relevant. It is in the
Vr̥tti on 1.5.11 that Utpala moots the notion of camatkāra by rendering
vimarśa as camatkāra equating it with sentience that distinguishes the
sentient from the insentient, the animate from the inanimate. In the
Vivr̥ti on the same this camatkr̥ti is further understood as unique or
special delight/pleasure (viśeṣaprīti) or unique or distinctive
experience (viśeṣapratīti), the second option representing “the view of
others”.

Taking cues from the Vr̥tti and Vivr̥ti Abhinavagupta resurrects his
metaphysics of rasa by identifying: (a) camatkāra with the savouring
activity of the gourmet, (b) this activity with joyful experience, and
(c) this joyful experience with subjective repose. Under ĪPK 2.4.20, the
Vivr̥ti presents the Vr̥tti as being the re-endorsement of 1.5.11 and
develops the notion of svātantrya in terms of camatkāra. This notion is
reconnected with the notion of rasa with Abhinavagupta suggesting mutual
complementarity between ĪPK1.5.11 and 2.4.20, specially as regards the
Vr̥tti and Vivr̥ti on the two. Under 2.4.20 Abhinavagupta highlights
Utpala’s twin formulations of camatkāra in terms of kriyā and icchā, the
former emerging as aesthetical, i.e. experiential formulation and the
latter as existential, i.e. ontological formulation. Abhinavagupta
demonstrates that the latter formulation is impacted by Somānanda and
pertains to the absolutic/supreme realm (parāvasthā) of reality, whereas
the former is Utpala’s ingenuous formulation and pertains to the
ultimate–non-ultimate (parāpara) realm of reality. Pandey’s ascription
of aesthetic experience (rasānubhava) to the level of Śakti category
might be understood in reference to this formulation. The notion of
camatkāra as developed under 1.1.3 (Vivr̥ti), 1.5.11 (Vr̥tti and Vivr̥ti),
1.5.13 (Abhinavagupta’s ĪPVV), 1.5.14 (Vivr̥ti), 2.3.7-8 (Abhinavagupta’s
ĪPVV) and 4.1.6 (Vr̥tti) represent kriyā-formulation, whereas that under
2.4.20 (Vivr̥ti) represents kriyā- and icchā-formulations both. In any
case both formulations transform camatkāra as constituting repose
(viśrānti) in the subject. One more notion of camatkāra offered by the
Vr̥tti under 4.1.1 contextually could be said to have ontological tidings
but on analysis (being instrumental to the “augmentation”, upabr̥ṁhaṇa)
transpires to be kriyā-formulation.

Let us now go into some more detail. Utpala’s starting point on
camatkāra happens to be the Vr̥tti on ĪPK 1.5.11,98 duly elaborated in
the Vivr̥ti. Unfortunately our access to the Vivr̥ti is fragmentary being
limited to the extracts by Abhinavagupta,99 occurring as part of his
comments. Nonetheless we get a fairly good idea of Utpala’s mind, even
if we look at them independently of Abhinavagupta’s long exegesis.
Abhinavagupta shows that Utpala in the role of the author of the Vivr̥ti
is intrigued by the unusual course adopted by (him in his another role
as) the author of the Vr̥tti in rendering vimarśa in terms of an unknown
category like camatkāra without any apparent compulsion. The reason
which emerges from Abhinavan presentation of the Vivr̥ti100 is that
Utpala is driven by the urge to develop vimarśa as the sole
aestheticizing principle and project it as a singular factor responsible
for dividing animate from inanimate. Animation, i.e. sentience, is the
capacity to enjoy oneself by self-objectification which inanimate, i.e.
insentient, utterly lacks. Thus camatkāra, representing as it does the
precise activity of the subject101 who is actually engrossed in
savouring, amounts to joy that embodies culmination of relish or
enjoyment. This is what constitutes the vitalizing essence of
prakāśa.102 Exactly this is the point which affords ample scope to
Abhinavagupta for bringing in his elaborate insights.103

Abhinavagupta seeks to put forth the following major stipulations:

1. Bliss or joy is the essence of “self” (sva-rūpa) and consists in
total self-actualization.

2. Joy, i.e. self-actualization, is possible in a state of total freedom
— freedom from dependence on/expectation from the other or from
interfering conditions which, when logically abstracted, constitute the
“other”. This absolute independence amounts to being established in
ecstatic thrill (camatkāra) characterized by (self-)savouring.104

3. One who primarily reflects upon the subjective aspect is called a
savourer or gourmet (bhuñjāna, lit. one who is savouring).105 This state
becomes possible only when there is no obstruction or interference in
tasting from any side and the objective aspect, technically styled as
prakāśa, is subordinated to the subjective aspect. This precisely
defines “aesthetic susceptibility” or “capability to appreciate”
(sahr̥dayatā: lit. condition of being endowed with heart) and is also
construed as “repose in subjecthood” (pramātr̥tā-viśrāntī).106

4. Abhinavagupta unearths a replicative affinity in art experience. He
identifies rasanā, the process of experiencing in poetry or drama, in
the nature of obstruction-free tasting, with pramātr̥tā-viśrānti (repose
in subjectivity) and rasa with the psychic or mental states being
objectified or forming content in such a tasting.107 Like metaphysics,
art in its most elevated stage, as I said elsewhere,108 “is always
brimming with joyous self-repose which eschews any counter force or
obstruction. That is why this state of consciousness is depicted as
paramabhoga, supreme enjoyment, in contrast to the ordinary bhoga”.

5. Abhinavagupta is therefore prompted to abstract parāmarśa or vimarśa
in terms of “reflective awareness in the nature of uniform dense
savouring” (rasanaikaghanatayā parāmarśaḥ) in respect of that one alone
who is free and marks his constant presence in the intrinsic
consciousness. Alternate nomenclature for camatkāra is nirvr̥ti (delight)
or paramānanda (absolute joy).109 Having foregrounded such an elaborate
analysis of the notion of camatkāra, Abhinavagupta feels assured that
Utpala, the author of the Vivr̥ti, now has enough justification for
supporting Vr̥tti’s instance in preferring camatkāra to vimarśa when it
comes to propounding the distinguishing feature of the sentient.110 What
is more, Abhinavagupta underscores his endorsement of the Vivr̥ti’s
viewing camatkāra as a “unique delightful experience” (viśeṣaprītiḥ) in
contrast with the “unique experience” (viśeṣapratītiḥ) as interpreted by
others (apareṣāṁ) on the strength of a variant reading. Thus the Vivr̥ti
is fully justified in concluding that vimarśa by virtue of its being
camatkāra could alone constitute sentience and as such it can rest only
on a knowing subject and not on the insentient or inert object.111

Though, unlike the Vr̥tti on ĪPK 1.5.11, the Vr̥tti on 2.4.20112 does not
mention camatkāra, the Vivr̥ti by subjecting the phrase svātantryābhāvāt
(“since it does not possess freedom/ owing to the absence of freedom”)
occurring in the Vr̥tti113 to the same format of scrutiny conclusively
establishes Utpala’s ultimate intention to develop svātantrya in terms
of camatkāra as the principle solely responsible from demarcating
sentient from insentient, and thereby to turn svātantryābhāvāt ipso
facto into camatkārābhāvāt.114 Abhinavagupta makes us conclude that
Utpala has two alternative formulations of svātantryābhāva as
kriyā’bhāva and icchā’bhāva respectively, both kriyā and icchā (action
and will) are finally abstracted as camatkāra. As regards
kriyā-formulation, the component camattva (camatkāra has two components:
camat + kāra) indicates continuation of original understanding as
savouring (bhuñjānatārūpam, lit. savouring subjecthood) and the other
component -kāra stands for action (kriyā). Thus syntactically camattva
becomes the object (karma) of the verb karoti (camattvaṁ karoti): evaṁ
bhuñjānatārūpaṁ camattvaṁ tad eva karoti. Accordingly “savouring”
(camatkāra) emerges as savouring activity indulged in by the tasting
subject.115 It is in this sense that the aesthetic savouring is seen as
an activity, as a process — a fact duly acknowledged by Abhinavagupta
reiterating the salient features of previous discussion and urging
reader to go over them under 1.5.11.116

Behind kriyā-formulation Utpala’s own metaphysics is at play. Kriyā is
nothing but vimarśa in the nature of camatkāra marking the highest
primordial stage of prakāśa. This is what goes by the name of svātantrya
(freedom). This kriyā (in ĪPK 2.4.20), that is, svātantrya, is beyond
icchā (will); the phenomenon of will comes next. This svātantrya
acquires the form of icchā when the potential object of will/desire
(iṣyamāṇa) comes into being. In this sense icchā belongs to the second
order of reality, i.e. the primary–secondary (parāpara) order. The same
svātantrya, having descended to the secondary or lower order of reality,
apara daśā of prakāśa, loses its perfection.117 It seems that with
reference to its definition of reality as prakāśa–vimarśa synthesis, or
being–becoming synthesis, the Vivr̥ti is abstracting vimarśa in the sense
of “freedom to be” (bhavanasvātantrya) inherent in the notion of “being”
(bhavana), analogous to the notion of prakāśana (illumination or
illuminating-activity) in prakāśa (light) and thereby projecting kriyā
(action) as kartr̥tā (agency), reminiscent of its formulation, e.g.
citkriyācitikartr̥tātātparyeṇa in ĪPK 1.5.12. Vimarśa, in such a
formulation, is camatkāra: self-reflecting awareness turns into
self-savouring awareness.118 In this formulation kriyā is the
presupposition of will which remains latent in it as integral aspect and
is manifested only on kriyā coming into play. To put it logically,
willing is to be deduced from kriyā. What is important from our
immediate point of view is that it provides an insight into
Abhinavagupta’s mind as to why he is so emphatic in associating
Bharata’s notion of rasa in the Vivr̥ti with this kind of formulation of
camatkāra. As its direct fall out, the word niṣpatti (lit. production)
in ‘rasa-niṣpatti’ in the Rasa Sūtra of Bharata is interpreted by
Abhinavagupta as belonging to the tasting = rasanā (as an activity) and
not rasa (as a substantive object), whereas rasa is the content of such
tasting and it is only metaphorically that the accomplishing or
production of rasa could be spoken of.119

Foundationally, camatkāra represents viśrānti (repose) in the subject.
This repose could be twofold, either in the nature of kriyā (action) as
we saw just now or as icchā, which is a legacy from Utpala’s
metaphysical tradition or, to be more exact, from his own teacher
Somānanda. For the sake of convenience we could call it
icchā-formulation. Exegeting two words from the Vivr̥ti, e.g. evaṁ and
athavā, Abhinavagupta uncodes the background of the alternative
formulation undertaken by Utpala. Elaborating evaṁ (thus, in this way)
Abhinavagupta states that prior formulation in terms of action is the
result of abstracted perception of prakāśa and vimarśa, śiva and śakti.
In this case śiva, viewed as divorced from śakti and hence reckoned as
śāntaśiva (quiescent Śiva), constituted the absolute state (parā daśā)
leaving no scope for will. Hence everything other than prakāśa, i.e.
Śiva, has to be accounted for in terms of action. Contrary to this, the
second formulation in terms of will indicated by athavā (or,
alternatively) stems from unitary perception of Śiva as ever-remaining
possessed of Śakti, the stand taken by the ŚD. On this view now it
becomes possible to have will even in the ultimate state and identify it
with camatkāra. Under this formulation, action is subsumed within
will.120

In this context Abhinavagupta comes out with two theorizations of
camatkāra. The first comes in the wake of his gloss on athavā from the
Vivr̥ti121 and is simply put: “everywhere savouring by itself is will”
(sarvatra camatkāra eva icchā). The second comes by way of explanation
of the Vivr̥ti’s “saiva hi”. Here the “subjective mode of relishing”
(camatkāritā) is defined in terms of “being in the agential mode of
savouring” (bhuñjānarūpatā) in the nature of will invariably marked by
self-repose. Simply stated, camatkāra is the state of subjective
savouring which is will universally characterized by self-repose.122 For
Abhinavagupta, the word “universally” (sarvatra, everywhere) has special
significance indicating that all human emotions and mental states are
the varied manifestations of will.123 In fact, the word sarvatra again
seems to be the legacy of Utpala himself, because in course of
developing his thesis Abhinavagupta refers to Utpala’s use of the word
ādi and exegetes it to imply even āṇavamala which he calls abhilāṣamala
(maculation of desire) (and in its trail autsukya eagerness/anxiety, and
others):124 it applies to situations where the objective referent, even
though having a generalized form, survives as a latent residual trace.
The deep-rooted impact of this formulation becomes fully evident in
several key areas of Abhinavagupta’s theory of rasa; first and foremost,
in his notion of universalization (sādhāraṇīkaraṇa) leading to the
uniformity of perception of the spectator which is also instrumental to
the uniform nourishment of rasa in all the spectators.125 It is because
the spectators’ minds are innately endowed with latent traces resonating
with each other, the minds being variegated by beginningless latent
traces.126 By extension this also provides basis for the permanent
nature (sthāyitva) of the enduring emotions (sthāyibhāva) because they
represent the forms of consciousness a living being is innately endowed
with in the form of the beginningless residual traces.127

The Vivr̥ti is now all set to sum up its rationalization of svātantrya in
terms of will (icchā), this is how Abhinavagupta wants us to understand.
But Abhinavagupta also wants us to appreciate that even on this
formulation the binary abstraction of camatkāra remains intact.128 The
notion of freedom may be approached in two ways: either with reference
to “will-to-be” (bubhūṣā-yogena) or without such reference (ayogena).
While the former position is easy to identify as the will-formulation,
the latter has to be taken as action-formulation even though the word
kriyā is not there.129 Technically, these could be reframed in terms of
viśrānti (repose, rest) taking the forms as kr̥iyālakṣaṇā viśrānti and
icchālakṣaṇā viśrānti (the reader may kindly bear with repetition). This
twofold formulating alters the meaning of viśrānti in their respective
applications. In action-formulation viśrānti is viśramaṇa, that is
“resting”: savouring (camatkāra) is “resting” in the non-dependent,
non-expectant self. It represents action being done — savouring-
activity being performed — by the subject (bhuñjānatā-rūpaṁ camat-tvaṁ,
tadeva karoti): savouring itself is “resting” in the subject.130 In
will-formulation viśrānti is “rest” (not “resting”): being in the state
of camatkāra (camatkāritā) is being in the state of a savouring subject
(bhuñjāna-rūpatā) characterized by rest in one’s own self.131

Though ĪPK 2.4.20 is the only place where (as per Abhinavagupta’s
showing) Utpala has directly put forward two clearly marked-out
approaches: one ascribed to himself and the other traced to his teacher,
this differentiation is consistently implicit in Abhinavagupta’s
presentation throughout. Under ĪPK 1.5.13 while glossing ekā from the
Vivr̥ti referring to Parā Vāk Abhinavagupta first refers to two discreet
states of Parama śiva as the holder of power (śaktimadrūpa) and as power
(śakti) itself, and renders Parā Vāk in terms of śakti identifying it
with parāmarśa. Whereas Parama śiva, i.e. śaktimān, represents the state
of absolute transcendence untouched by the traces of variety consisting
of subject–object, Parā Vāk is the homologized totality of the
differentiated potential creation. What is striking, Parā Vāk is viewed
as āsvāda, i.e. as the state full (of relishing) of one’s own magnitude
(ābhoga), which Abhinavagupta reckons as camatkāra (savouring) in the
nature of reflective awareness of one’s own expansion
(nijābhogaparāmarśātmā).132 In Abhinavagupta’s technical parlance, the
term ābhoga represents processive action or function (vyāpāra)
constituted by discovering (such progression as) emergence, nourishment
and recurring reflection (lit. chewing) with regard to the consciousness
element (cidbhāva) submerged in the midst of the traces of numberless
objects lying within (antarbruḍita) the knowing awareness
(saṁvedana).133 It is interesting to note that Abhinavagupta invokes ŚSĀ
13.15 (of Utpala),134 the same verse which Utpala himself cites while
formulating Somānanda’s āmoda in terms of camatkāra in the Padasaṁgati
on SD 1.7. Attention to this has been drawn earlier.135

This is no doubt Utpala’s own pet formulation. But Abhinavagupta here
finds scope for another formulation, attributed to Somānanda, as well.
On the alternative construction Abhinavagupta says that Parameśvara,
i.e. Parama śiva, is never for a moment bereft of such (tadrūpa, i.e.
“being of the nature of that”) nature, i.e. He is never without Śakti or
self-reflective awareness as has been so far presented (evam). In order
to prove his point he relies upon ŚD 3.56.136 No doubt, the imprint of
camatkāra in its will-formulation mode is quite explicit here.

In the ĪPVV137 on 1.5.14 Abhinavagupta develops Utpala’s insight still
further remaining glued to Utpala’s original kriyā-formulation of
camatkāra. As we have already seen earlier, in the Kārikā and in the
Vr̥tti Utpala talks of two complementary reductions of self-reflecting
awareness (pratyavamarśātmā citiḥ), e.g. foundation (pratiṣṭhā) as well
as heart (hr̥daya). The prime focus of the Vivr̥ti is on establishing
vimarśa as heart whether the two formulations are taken independently or
conjointly where the former acts as the logical reason for the
latter.138 From whatever of the Vivr̥ti that has come down to us,139 it
is clear that Utpala offers a complete argument towards building up his
notion of heart.

Abhinavagupta demonstrates that in this kārīkā Utpala takes a serialized
route for architecting his notion of heart. Displaying its unique
characteristic, vimarśa-śakti transforms causality (kāraṇatā) into
agency (kartr̥tā). Causality by definition is constrained by its
dependence on, or reference to, the effect (kārya). Agency (kartr̥tā) is
therefore causality freed from cause-dependence or cause-reference. The
implication, in no uncertain terms, being that Parama Śiva is not just a
mere cause but the agent on whom entire phenomenal creation rests.140 As
such agency is to be necessarily perceived in terms of the absolute
autonomy (svātantrya). It is this autonomy that Utpala believes has
camatkāra for its intrinsic essence (camatkr̥tirūpatvāt).141 As to the
definition of this camatkr̥ti we have no direct word from Utpala in the
present context but Abhinavagupta constructs it as “repose culminating
in the ultimate enjoyment (paramabhoga) characterized by joy”
(ānandātmakaparamabhogaparyantā viśrāntiḥ). This is exactly the same
formulation that we saw Abhinavagupta undertake while formulating
camatkāra (ānandātmā paramo bhogaḥ) in his exegesis of the word pūrṇa
from the Vivr̥ti on 1.1.3 and to which an allusion has already been
made.142 Resorting to the reverse identification of camatkāra with
unalloyed autonomy (viśuddha svātantrya), where there is no room
whatsoever for dependence occasioned by obstruction or restriction, if
we believe Abhinavagupta, Utpala serves two purposes with a single
stroke in the form of present thesis: one, he lays down the foundation
for his upcoming theory of multifaceted and transcausal creation (note
the semantic richness of the word vicitra in vicitranirmāṇa) to be taken
up in the next kārikās (1.5.15-16), and two, establishing heart as
constituting foundation of universal consciousness (viśvacetana) in the
primary sense of the term.143 This formulation seems to contain several
implications which could be seen as aesthetically meaningful. Art
experience, and for that matter rasa experience, represents a unique
kind of tasting (āsvāda), described by art theoreticians as rasanā (cp.
camatkāra as āsvāda/ ānanadātmakaparamabhoga) that consists in
obstructionless awareness (cp. pratighātaleśarahita svātantrya), art
creation and artistic creativity that eschews causal laws and boasts of
endless variety (cp. transcausal agency and vicitranirmāṇa emanating
from self-reposed blissful autonomy).

We come across one more direct formulation of camatkāra in Utpala’s
Vr̥tti on 4.1.1.144 Utpala develops akhaṇḍāmarśa as tanmelanācamatkāra
deliberately underscoring the essential nature of the reflective
awareness constituted by “savouring” that marks the fusion, the
interactive unification of the unfragmented knowing subject with the
unfragmented knowable object. Melanā (fusion) is a form of action that
befits Utpala’s characterstic attitude in approaching the problem of
relishing. The formulation of akhaṇḍāmarśa in terms of
tan-melanācamatkāra, that is, savouring as fusing, as unifying, as
integrating — is an attempt to evaluate savouring in a relational
context. Viewed from the perspective of art, the notion of saṁyoga, i.e.
combination of various ingredients of art creation and appreciation,
carries structural significance. Perhaps it might sound a far-fetched
suggestion, yet it does revive memory of saṁbandhe sāvadhānatā and
underlies the integration of the universalized (de-individualized)
subject with the universalized (de-individualized) object unshackled
from the individuating factors in an aesthetic situation.

It would be only fair to digress a little bit from Utpala’s direct
inputs on camatkāra to some indirect ones where he is seen to draw
inspiration from his teacher Somānanda, particularly with pointed
reference to the latter’s idea of nirvr̥ti145 (in the absence of a better
equivalent the nearest term could be sublime/serene delight or blissful
sublimity).146 Abhinavagupta is developing Utpala’s concluding remark
while winding up the foregoing discussion in the Vivr̥ti on 1.5.11:
“Hence it has been rightly said ‘(He) Himself shines like that
(tathā)’.”147 And his explanation is: “Thus ‘I’ constitute the
foundational essence (vapuḥ, lit. body) of light in the nature of
sublime delight (nirvr̥tirūpaṁ), characterized by reflective awareness
(vimarśa).”148 The preceding long discussion149 establishes the
absolutism of prakāśa, denying any legitimacy to the division of
luminous consciousness into knower, known and relation between them:
everything is prakāśa and this prakāśana (manifestation) is nothing but
vimarśa (reflective awareness). However, this is the standard position
of the system but what makes it peculiar is its context and placement.
This discussion is coming up just in the wake of Utpala’s discussion on
camatkāra as a sole discriminating factor between conscious and
unconscious and its delighting characteristic,150 with which we are
already conversant. Since camatkāra or sentience, of necessity, rests in
the subject, the residual reflective awareness survives in the form of
“I” only. Now at this point Abhinavagupta calls our attention to the
fact that this distinction between prakāśa and vimarśa was thoroughly
brought home by Utpala in the Vivr̥ti on 1.1.3 at the time of discussing
the sentence: “Moreover, reflective awareness never stoops (āskandati,
lit. attacks/assaults) to the plane of thisness.”151 The reason being
that all reflective awareness must strive to rest on the subject alone,
hence it is logically impossible to shine as “I” in the realm of “this”.
Now, when we go back to this portion of the text under 1.1.3152 we find,
to our amazement, that the notion of pure, unmixed, i.e. absolute
subjectivity is reduced to the notion of camatkāra and is explained
thus. Vimarśa, whether it refers to the subject or to the object, does
rest in the subject. But their mutual distinctions arise from the planes
of prakāśa they belong to. Utpala, as per Abhinavagupta’s presentation,
stipulates two planes of prakāśa: the absolute, that is, free from the
objective colouration, identified with the subject and represented by
“I” marking repose in the unbroken light of consciousness; and the
relative (this word is not used by either, Utpala or Abhinavagupta),
that is coloured or affected by object, and identified with means of
knowing (i.e. pramāṇa). The freedom from affection is what constitutes
“purity” or “absoluteness” of prakāśa, which accounts for the action,
being done in the form of reflectively reacting (saṁrambha) by the
savouring subject, “It is I who am the enjoyer of the objects such as
blue, etc.” and distinguishes by definition the conscious subject from
the insentient object.

Having been thus equipped with the background by Abhinavagupta we can
now pick up the thread from where we started: “Hence it has been rightly
said ‘(He) Himself shines like that’.”153 This is what characterizes
vimarśa’s essence as blissful sublimity (nirvr̥ti).154 Not only the
reflective awareness “I”, but even the objective categories such as body
and vital breath where it is superimposed also shine as full of sublime
delight. Abhinavagupta makes it clear that he owes this idea to Utpala.
I may draw the attention of the reader to a similar proposition in the
ABh, where Abhinavagupta holds obstruction-free awareness as standing
for camatkāra proper and the physical effects arising therefrom also as
camatkāra (which could for the sake of precision be described as
secondary).155 Due to the striking similarity one cannot miss to notice
Utpala’s influence on Abhinavan stipulation. However, Abhinavagupta’s
main concern is to show Utpala’s indebtedness to Somānanda in linking
camatkāra to nirvr̥ti. Responding to a probable opponent Abhinavagupta is
convinced that even the so-called painful experiences are intrinsically
marked by joyful relish (camatkāra) because of the presence of “I”. It
is only by undergoing the process of enjoyment that the experiencing
subject makes his pain rest only within. Since the subject is
preoccupied with the outside object, which now stands destroyed due to
pragmatic considerations, he is unmindful of the inner rest even though
the inner rest is very much there. However, as a result of regaining
composure due to specialized training, the inner rest gains ground
disregarding or subduing the external object. This idea Abhinavagupta
ascribes to the ŚD: “In pain also, through the blossoming, i.e.
expansion (of the essential nature).”156 With this formulation
Abhinavagupta takes us back to the notion of aesthetic susceptibility
(sahr̥dayatā), developed only a few paragraphs back in course of his
presentation of the Vivr̥ti’s rationalization of camatkr̥ter abhāvāt
occurring in the Vr̥tti. Sahr̥dayatā constitutes the mental state of a
connoisseur when the appreciative awareness (represented by heart:
hr̥daya and homologized with parāmarśa) gains prominence over the
objective content of art owing to the disregard or subjugation of the
prakāśa aspect grounded in and represented by the objective
configuration.157 Thus the affinity between the two notions of
sahr̥dayatā and bhuñjānatā becomes quite transparent, because bhuñjānatā
(savouring subjecthood) too consists in primarily relishing of the
subjective aspect alone.158

Somānanda seems to have visualized three stages of soteriological
progression duly appropriated by Utpala (as Abhinavagupta would have it)
as forming three stages of camatkāra.159 These could be constructed in
the following manner

i. Loosening of imposition of camatkāra (camatkārādhyāsa-śithilana),

ii. transmitting the grasp or reception of camatkāra
(camatkāra-grahābhisañcāraṇa), and

iii. abiding in the state of thrill characterized by camatkāra
(camatkārānandadaśāvalambana)

with reference to a seeker on way to salvation. The first stage marks
the unfastening of the savouring of I-consciousness from his body; the
second stands for the transfer or transfusion of the same into the body
of a higher order or superior abode and the third represents the
ultimate state brimming with joy of savouring free from obstacles keenly
sought to be embraced by those who having reached the final phase are
fully geared to discard the mortal frame. Despite the overall tone of
the entire presentation being soteriological the three characteristic
features of camatkāra, namely, I-centricity, freedom from obstructions
and joyousness, are conspicuously present in this formulation as
well.160

However, one must remember that Somānanda’s contribution is limited to
offering philosophical flashes for creating a perspectival backdrop for
future aesthetic speculations. Utpala’s contribution is much deeper.
Though he does not lay down a theory of art as such, he furnishes a
framework supported by a logical and ontological rationalization
congenial for the flowering of aesthetic speculation. So far as the
full-blooded theory of art is concerned, the sole credit has to be
accorded to Abhinavagupta for fully appropriating these insights for
building up a system.

Camatkāra as Rasa-Experience and

Rasa as Its Content: āsvādya

Through his profound and exhaustive hermenutics of camatkāra, primarily
under ĪPK 1.5.11 and 2.4.20, Abhinavagupta highlights Utpala’s emphasis
on developing camatkāra as rasa-experience (rasanā), a state of
aesthetic enjoyment (āsvāda). But at the same time Abhinavagupta,
remaining fully alive to Bharata’s legacy, shows that Utpala is equally
conscious that this experience is not possible in the absence of its
content (āsvādya). This aspect Utpala develops under ĪPK 1.8.3-4 and
1.8.9 as well as under 2.3.7. The main focus of ĪPK 1.8.9 is to develop
an ontology so as to explain how psychic mental states become content of
aesthetic experience even while retaining their innate internality.
Integral to this process it also seeks to develop an ontology of
immediacy in perception, i.e. experience of the aesthetic content. ĪPK
2.3.7 together with its Vr̥tti is addressed to establishing the unique
non-ordinary yet unitary character of rasa experience arising from the
uniqueness of the object of experience by embracing the model of a
svalakṣaṇa, i.e. individualized existential objective unit of
experience. Reading with ĪPK 1.3.7, 1.4.2 and 2.2.2 it further provides
a structure and an epistemic blueprint for the underlying process of the
rasa nourishment.

Let us look at it in some more detail. As already observed above,
Abhinavagupta is fully aware that Utpala is a metaphysician and as such
aesthetics is not his (Utpala’s) immediately legitimate concern and
appropriates all credit for aesthetic theorizing to himself,161 but at
the same time what is noteworthy is that he is deliberately unravelling
the aesthetic potential of his master’s insights precisely at those very
spots. Under 1.5.11 Utpala’s reduction of vimarśa to camatkr̥ti prompts
Abhinavagupta to further reduce it to taste, relish (āsvāda), i.e.
experience. According to Abhinavagupta this experience, i.e. taste,
could be multifold or varied and has for its object mental states that
represent nine rasas which have been thoroughly analysed in
Abhinavagupta’s gloss on the Nāṭyaśāstra.162 However, Abhinavagupta does
not leave us in doubt that the precise inspiration of his contention is
Utpala himself. While explaining the phrase sukhādeḥ (of the pleasure,
etc.) in ĪPK 1.8.9163 and duly cited in the Vivr̥ti he takes it to stand
for all the mental states categorized as permanent (sthāyin) and
transient (vyabhicārin) propounded by authorities like Bharata (the
celebrated author of the NŚ), etc.164 I have no doubt that this idea
does hail from Utpala, because Abhinavagupta consistently repeats his
observation as well as linkage with Bharata in the ĪPV on this
kārikā.165 And we are fully aware that Abhinavagupta’s professed aim in
the ĪPV is to bring out the real purport of Utpala’s aphorisms.166 Not
only the permanent emotions, even the inclusion of the transitory mental
states is suggested by Utpala’s explicit mention of lajjā (shame,
blushing) in the Vr̥tti.167 Glossing atadrūpāc ca from the
Vivr̥ti,Abhinavagupta makes it abundantly clear that Vr̥tti’s recourse to
lajjā is intended to underscore its categorial distinction from pleasure
and pain, etc. and is indicatory of the transitory mental states in
general such as anxiety, etc.168 From what we have seen it appears that
Utpala, at the back of his mind, wanted to evolve an inclusive
metaphysics that could answer and account for the main issues in
aesthetics as well: how the mental images and emotive states are
objectified; how their grasp or reception, despite taking place at
mental level, tends to be as unmediated as sense-perception. In his
answer Utpala first clubs pleasure, etc. with mental imagery (ullekha:
lit. projection/inscribing/painting/carving)169 and considers them as
external. In this case the word ‘external’ has a technical sense. There
are two types of externality in Kashmir Śaivism: one, general or
primary, and the other, secondary or sense-perceptual (bāhyatā and
bāhyendriyavedyatā). The primary externality consists in non-identity
with or differentiation from the subject, the I, and is therefore
reckoned as graspability or knowability (grāhyatā). A thing becomes an
object of knowing only when it is de-identified with or differentiated
from the knowing subject. The other externality consists in its
perceptibility by the external sense faculties. As regards the external
objects, their externality is double, they are separated from the
subject and also from the object of the sense-perception. But in case of
the internal objects, i.e. realities in the mental or conceptual domain,
their externality is single, i.e. conceptual, primary in the sense that
though they abide in as well as are perceived by mind, i.e. the internal
sense/s, they can no longer be identified with their intrinsic
subjective essence.170 Their “internality” is also similarly restricted,
it is “locational” with reference to their seat of occurrence and inner
instrumentalities of cognition, but not “essential” owing to their
externalization due to loss of oneness with the inner subjectivity.
Pleasure, pain, emotions, psychic states and mental figurings constitute
and belong to this realm only. Utpala likens this internality as
residual trace-like subsistence within I-ness.171

Utpala at this point introduces a subtle distinction even within the
sphere of second type of externality having enormous significance from
our point of view.172 According to him, not only jar, etc. popularly
known external entities, but even the entities that are mentally
projected, pictured, imagined, represented, or visualized/recreated in
meditation and which are specially brought under the semantic umbrella
of the word ullekha173 too need be treated as sense-perceptible external
objects. The only difference between the worldly objects and the
mentally constructed or willed ones is that while the former enjoys the
actual externality, the latter does so by its potential fitness
(yogyatayā).174 Thus the external things as well as the mentally created
ones not actually apprehended through the external senses partake of
both types of externality, viz., subjectivity-alienation and
sense-perception. Contrary to this the experiential and emotive states
of mind such as pleasure and pain are considered to be grasped via
internal senses only and are supposed to be external in the technical
sense of missing intrinsic unity with I-awareness.175

Equipped with this minute analysis, Utpala is well poised to take next
logical step in proclaiming that this external manifestation is purely
mental, i.e. it takes place through the mind (here called
“intellectual”: bauddha) alone and the mental projection and psychic
states grasped are as vivid and immediate as in perceptual experience of
form, colour, etc. through normal sense-organs such as eye.176 By the
chosen use of the word “as” (yathā in the Kārikā and iva in the
Vr̥tti)177 Utpala again very subtly, one must note, underlines the
relationship of the illustration (dr̥ṣṭānta) and the illustrated
(dārṣṭāntika) between the objects of sense-perception such as jar and
form and those of internal/mental perception such as mental imagery and
pleasure.178 This again is going to prove very helpful in our ongoing
pursuit.

What Utpala is intending to prove [and for which he employs ĪPK 1.8.4
and Vr̥tti thereon]179 is that

(i) this spontaneity and immediacy of perception as regards the mental
states and representations is not simply a datum, a presentation by the
empirical circumstances, but something that could be reproduced, vividly
recreated180 in the present;181

(ii) this could be achieved through intense and uninterrupted mental
representation, contemplation, for which Abhinavagupta has coined a
special term: nirantaro vikalpaḥ or nirantarotprekṣaṇa (unbroken
ideation, projection);182 (iii) this could be wrought by seeking
recourse to certain special effort or preparation;183 and

(iv) once actualized it is as efficacious and effective in generating
the desired effect such as blooming or joyful state (of mind)
(vikāsādihetuḥ).184

A Digression: Utpala as the Sole Inspiration

Behind Ullekha-Alaṁkāra

It may not be entirely unfair to digress a little at this point. Towards
the beginning of this paper I had mentioned Kane’s drawing our attention
to Utpala’s direct impact on the figure of speech called ullekha, which
Kane translates as “representation”.185 Perhaps, it was Ruyyaka alias
Rucaka (circa 1125-75) who conceived this figure of speech.186 According
to him, perceiving one and the same thing in different ways owing to
differing factors is termed ullekha.187 The word ullekha carries the
imprint of Utpalan usage of the term in the sense of “picturing up in
imagination” (Pandey) or “reproduction/recreation due to representation”
or “mental representation” (Torella).188 The reason for multiple grasp
is the inherent capacity of having manifold representation
(rūpabāhulyayogena) in the item described.189 The causal factors that
make such diversified representation in respect of a single entity
endowed with multiple traits possible are three — taste, purpose and the
cultural insight.190 This formulation of Ruyyaka is self-acknowledgedly
inspired by Utpala’s famous kārikā (i.e. ĪPK 2.3.3) that defines the
nature of an object of a means of cognition. “In an object, even though
it is established as one by the ontological synthetic activity (of mind)
(its) manifestation may be differentiated according to the taste, the
practical purpose and the knowledge of the established usage (of the
perceiving subject).”191 Though Ruyyaka does not name Utpala, the kārikā
is cited in full and Jayaratha in his Vimarśinī identifies the precise
textual source as the ĪPK.192 Not only this, Jayaratha’s explanation
fully echoes the linguistic nuances of the Pratyabhijñā
conceptualization as well.193 Ruyyaka’s prescription that in a poet’s
scheme these causal factors may be deployed, either jointly or
severally,194 there is no restriction to it, is again lifted from
Utpala’s Vr̥tti.195 The only literary variation introduced by Ruyyaka is
that he talks of the two varieties of this poetic representation. The
first occurs where the same object is apprehended by different
percipients in different ways owing to different factors. Ruyyaka picks
up portrayal of Śrīkaṇṭha-janapada from the Harṣacarita of Bāṇa (3rd
chapter) for illustrating the same. The one and same Śrīkaṇṭha habitat
is apprehended as a hermitage by the sages, as a seat of amorous
activities by the prostitutes and as a concert hall by the
choreographers depending upon their aptitude, requirement and learnt
skills.196 The second variety takes place where one and the same thing
is delineated variously due to difference of object (viṣaya) or, going
by the Citra-Mīmāṁsā or Rasa-Gaṅgādhara, that of locus (āśraya).197 The
reason for difference in multiple representations lies in their
producing a distinct kind of poetic charm (vicchittyantara).

Jayaratha (circa 1150–1200), the author of the Vimarśinī commentary on
the Alaṁkāra-Sarvasva was himself a celebrated Pratyabhijñā philosopher.
Besides the observation that we saw above he specially renders
representation (ullekha) in terms of grasping or apprehending (grahaṇam)
and not in terms of imaginative projection or reproduction, since
perception or apprehension includes both types of cognitive episodes,
free imagination as well as generated perceptions. In sharp contrast to
Utpala’s stand that word-synthesis is the indispensable component of an
ābhāsa, Jayaratha thinks that this is not an invariable constituent of
imaginary productions but nevertheless remains open to being grasped.198
The anonymous author of the Samudrabandha commentary (circa 1250–1300)
from Kolamba in the south appears thoroughly well-versed in the system,
since his interpretation of the term anusandhāna (synthesizing) in terms
of reflection of the several particulars by combining, mixing or
blending them in a dynamic leading-subordinate relationship is
unmistakably reminiscent of the Śaivist view of the same.199 The other
commentator, again from deep south, Śrīvidyācakravartī (circa
1291–1342), the author of the Sañjīvinī commentary is a well-known
Kashmir Śaivist and is famous for his brilliant commentary on the
Virūpākṣa-Pañcāśikā. He innovates on the notion of ullekha interpreting
it as determination by specification or selection (nirdhāraṇa) as
compared to apprehension or imaginative projection.200 The precise
function of anusandhāna is nirdhāraṇa. It is in relation to such a
definitively selected object that the ābhāsa operates. Ābhāsa is,
likewise, construed as experience, perceptual knowledge or cognition
(pratīti) and not as an epistemic object. Thus ullekha alaṁkāra leads to
the rise of cognitive reaction full of multiple representations.201

This figure of speech found wide acceptance in the later phases of the
Alaṁkāraśāstra. The spirited exchange between and the inputs by the
Citra-Mīmāṁsā, Sāhitya-Darpaṇa, Candrāloka and Rasa-Gaṅgādhara, etc. is
a proof to that effect. I have however to leave it here for reasons of
relevance and space.

Rasa as the Content of Aesthetic

Experience, i.e. āsvādya, Continued

Resuming the main discussion we can now connect Abhinavagupta’s several
insights with Utpala’s erstwhile theorization. Pandey in his pioneering
work on aesthetics points to the twofold formulation of rasa as an
aesthetic object and as an aesthetic experience.202 Bharata primarily
viewed rasa as an aesthetic object203 having twin dimensions: external
and internal. The external represents the dramatic presentation on the
stage. The internal aesthetic object, as shown by Abhinavagupta,
consists of permanent and transient mental states, whereas the aesthetic
experience represents a dynamic flow of subjective relishing.204 Now all
these psychic states, by virtue of their being mind-located and
mind-born and being grasped exclusively by internal sense-organ (that
is, the mind) constitutively and epistemically happen to be internal and
yet they constitute the aesthetic object could be understood only in
terms of Utpala’s ontology of externality primarily in terms of
knowability (grāhyatā), and secondarily in those of the twin levels of
sense-perceptibility, as regards the external objects and the internal
states of mind. This explains why rasa-experience is regarded as the
nearest kith and kin of the soteriological experience
(brahmāsvāda-sahodara) but not identical with it. Not only this, the
entire rasa- or nāṭya-experience is viewed as perception-like
(pratyakṣa-kalpa), mental determinate ascertainment (adhyavasāya) or
introspection (anuvyavasāya) or ideation (saṅkalpa) and not the
perception as such.205 It may be taken as a general characterstic of all
kinds of art experience. In so doing the ontological reality is not
compromised, nor its efficacy in producing joyous reactions in the
spectator. Utpala’s recourse to “special effort” (prayatna-viśeṣa) in
recreating a spectacle through concentrated prolonged attention without
a break has definite bearing on the aesthetic phenomenon. Pandey has
shown in detail206 that the aesthete’s visual relation with the dramatic
presentation is only a conduit to the aesthetic object. His real concern
is the object recreated and perceptively reappraised in the imagination.
The artefact given, the object present, the content posited by the
artist, actor and poet or by music, poetry and drama is reconstructed
and revalued by the spectator mentally. This is what Abhinavagupta has
called “introspection” (anuvyavasāya) after Utpala.207 The real
implication behind Utpala’s prayatna-viśeṣa-doctrine is fully brought
out by Abhinavagupta when he says that the precise purpose behind
undertaking a dramatic act is to enable even those spectators, whose
aesthetic susceptibility is yet to develop fully, to directly savour
rasa.208 The same thing applies to the meditation in the religious
domain. The deity visualized or contemplatively actualized in meditation
is not that drawn and painted in vermilion outside but one that figures
in the vivid imagination or mental apperception of the worshipper. Hence
Abhinavagupta notices a strong replicative parallelism between the two
processes of meditation and drama and, for that matter, the entire
performing art.209 Utpala’s present theorization lies in the very root
of Abhinavagupta’s purported distinguishing the epistemic object from
the aesthetic object, ingeniously formulated by Pandey in terms of
dyadic and triadic relationship respectively.210 In the epistemic sphere
we have only a dyadic relation, i.e. subject–object relation, whereas in
the aesthetic sphere the relationship is triadic as it consists of
subject, object and the imaginative construction. It is the third
element, i.e. imaginative construction, that transforms the object into
a “medium” (mādhyama or upāya) of the aesthetic experience. This holds
good in respect of meditation and contemplation as well.

As noted earlier, Bharata in his famous rasa-sūtra is primarily
concerned with rasa as an aesthetic object, i.e. something to be
presented on stage (pradarśya, rūpya), that is the object of
relish/taste produced by dramatic presentation (āsvādya). The most
remarkable feature of this aesthetic object according to Bharata is that
it represents an organic unity of the diversity of determinants,
consequents and transient mental states (anekasya ekatā). Another point
that he makes is that rasa as an aesthetic object is a configuration and
as such is different from the basic mental state, called sthāyin, which
is only one of the several constituents. The third aspect stressed by
Bharata is that this unity of permanent mental state (sthāyī) in the
multiplicity of determinants, etc. consists in (or is the outcome of)
“combination”, “blending” or “fusion” (saṁyoga) of these
constituents.211 The fourth and perhaps most meaningful purport is
Bharata’s implied insistence on the uniqueness and novelty of the
aesthetic object, which though a combined product of its constituents is
not contained in them and is different from them and is produced anew.
In order to make his proposition intelligible on all these counts
Bharata resorts to the analogy of a concoction (pāka) or specially
concocted ancient Indian drink known as ṣāḍava (and the like:
ṣāḍavādayaḥ),212 made up of six flavours.

There is an amazing convergence of approach between Bharata and Utpala
so far as their basic paradigm of unity-in-multiplicity is concerned. In
fact, this convergence extends to all fronts. Utpala resorts to the same
analogy of the pānaka in his Vr̥tti for explaining his concept of a
unique particular, svalakṣaṇābhāsa (lit. self-defined manifestation), as
configuration of several distinct universal manifestations
(sāmānyalakṣaṇa) and how the idea of unity or singularity is generated
from the combination of diverse constituent ābhāsas and how the
resultant ābhāsa discharges an altogether new function, different from
the respective functions of its erstwhile constituents.213 Utpala
interprets this unity in terms of unilocality (sāmānādhikaraṇya) which
he defines as unity of what is multifold. A thing or an objective entity
(vastu) owes its being to the manifestation of the sameness of locus.214
In ĪPK 2.3.7 and Vr̥tti thereon, Utpala is focused on two things: one,
the idea of oneness (aikyabuddhi) which as a category of knowledge
directly involves unity of reflective awareness (ekavimarśaḥ) on the
part of the knowing subject in the first place and the singleness of
functional efficacy on the objective side in the second place;215 and
two, the idea of oneness is solely sourced to the process of mingling,
blending, or mixing embodied in or represented by svalakṣaṇa.216
Utpala’s immediate overriding motive is to look for the raison d’être
governing the process of “mixing up” or “getting mixed” which is
conveyed by the adjective aviruddha qualifying ābhāsānām in the
kārikā.217 As such, only those constituents that are mutually compatible
or lack inter se contrariety get mixed up. With this formulation Utpala
reframes the terms of mixing up which to him is not a simple exercise of
joining or piecing together of diverse entities at a given spatial
locale but a sort of chemical compounding where one constituent is
capable of entering deep into another constituent
(parasparānupraveśakṣamāḥ — Vr̥tti) and thereby transforming each
participating constituent from within. The ensuing efficacy from such a
fusion, Utpala maintains (as Abhinavagupta shows with specific reference
to the former’s Vivr̥ti), is nothing short of a unique aestheticizing
flavour (camatkāra)218 which is fully instanced by the example of the
pānaka in the Vr̥tti.219 In his Vivr̥ti on ĪPK 1.4.2 Utpala enlarges on
this issue220 where he renders “combining together” (saṁbhūya) as mutual
delimitation (anyo’nyāvaccheda). For Utpala, this process of mutual
delimitation is an ongoing dynamic process which could happen by turn,
by succession or by reversal of the adjunctive roles among the
constituents (parasparaṁ paryāyāvacchedaḥ) enabling the same group of
universals, which though mutually exclusive and distinct (parasparaṁ
bhedaḥ) yet set in relationship of either “qualifier and qualified” or
of “principal and subordinate”, to produce a multiplicity of particulars
by shift in delimitational emphasis. The Vivr̥ti converts “absence of
contradiction” (avirodha) in the Kārikā into compatibility or congruity
(ānuguṇya) serving as the sole basis of mutual delimitation among the
components.221 Abhinavagupta in his detailed analysis brings out some
salient implications in Utpala’s conceptualization and applies it to the
pānaka. The group of universals that become svalakṣaṇa suffer two kinds
of delimitations: primary, by time and space (which are ābhāsas in
themselves: deśakālābhāsāvaccheda) and secondary, by companion
constitutive universals (annyo’nyāvaccheda). Thus the intrinsic nature
of a thing (bhāva) that is determinately grasped or constructed always
remains expanded (vikasitasvabhāva) and shines in its original universal
splendour once the reference to time and space is forsaken. The
secondary delimitation (anyo’nyāvaccheda) results into control or
restriction of the capacity of one constituent by another
(anyonyaśaktiniyantraṇā) thereby paving way for the rise of a single
particular which even though subjected to a synchronous
inter-delimitation occasions a different and a fresh function. Thus
pānaka, produced out of the combination of six flavours, produces
flavour of ṣāḍava, etc. having a novel original flavour (apūrva
rasa).222 Just as the action of an expert cook is primarily helpful in
preparing a delicious concoction, the Power of Necessity (niyati-śakti)
is equally important in the rise of a particular.

For Utpala the analogy of the pānaka seems to be immensely valuable and
advantageous, since he goes much deeper into allied implications, if we
go by the Vivr̥ti-Vimarśini. In his Vivr̥ti on 2.3.7 and also on 2.3.8223
he re-emphasizes his stand that the constituents of a thing by virtue of
its being a configuration are necessarily coordinated and synthesized in
a flexible principal–subordinate/primary–secondary relationship and
never so on an equal footing. This he sees occurring due to the
interplay of subjective involvement. In the illustration in hand, i.e.
pānaka, a person who owing to the preponderance of bile or phlegm, etc.
experiences only one, sweet or sour, flavour and has no feel of several
flavours present would squarely fail to savour the real flavour of the
pānaka. Even the direct perception of the presence of different
ingredients in the mixture would be of no help, because all our mental
operations grounded in unity–multiplicity syndrome are subjective
functions. Hence a person who has never tasted pepper, jaggery, etc.
before and is tasting the pānaka alone (for the first time), would not
be able to distinguish the difference in taste even after the perception
of varied components. But the one who has past experience of the variety
of formative flavours would instantly recognize the identicality and
difference of the present drink with reference to his previous
impressions. Analysing the three experiences as above Utpala concludes
that the unitary particularity of the product is result of the two
factors: one, subjective, which consists in the reflective appraisal of
the perception (anubhavavimarśabalāt), and two, objective, which
consists in the respective contributions of the components towards
producing a whole (kāryabalād api ekābhāsaḥ). Utpala warns that the rise
of a new flavour in the form of the pānaka from pepper, etc. owing to
their association with different substances like jaggery, etc. must not
be confused with the chemical change in the form/colour that one notices
in the catechu mixed with lime in a betel leaf (tāmbūlīdale
cūrṇakasitakhadirāṇām), because the expert drinker is always able to
discern the flavourical nuances caused by respective causal substances
such as pepper. Thus the pānaka analogy is not resorted to illustrate
the element of unilocality (sāmānādhikaraṇya: unity of diversity) but to
bring home the uniqueness of the unitary configuration. Thus at the
level of pānaka the attributive–substantive relationship does no longer
survive: “jaggery is indeed curd”, “pepper is indeed jaggery” — neither
such a phenomenon is there (prakhyā), nor is one determinately so
grasped (upākhyā). What shines and what is so perceived is pānaka alone
in its unique singularity.

From illustration (dr̥ṣṭānta) we are well poised to move on to the issue
to be illustrated (dārṣṭāntika), i.e. aesthetic object: rasa. We could
now be confident that Abhinavagupta sees Bharata configure rasa, the
object of aesthetic relish, which is the sole presentable and the
unitary total effect of the dramatic action on the pattern of svalakṣaṇa
and the process of saṁyoga (combination) unifying the basic emotion
(sthāyin) with other constituents (vibhāva, etc.) on the model of
sāmānādhikaraṇya (unity of many: anekasya ekatā — Vr̥tti). As we saw in
Utpala, so we see again in Abhinavagupta, that to him the analogy of a
concoction, pāka (instantiated by pānaka in the present case), embodies
a model of a proper and complete coordination (samyak yojanā),224 not
just an assemblage of cooperative factors. If we look at the language
employed by Abhinavagupta, it simply resonates Utpala. In
Abhinavagupta’s reformulation this combination has three essential
elements, viz. (i) the vibhāva etc. constituents unite not on horizontal
plane but in a dynamic configuration of primary–secondary relationship
or turnwise “leading or subordinate position” (following Gnoli 1968: 72)
(guṇapradhānatayā paryāyeṇa); (ii) the combination could be in either of
the two modes: a proper holistic coordination or a focused
one-pointedness attained in respect of the constituents; and (iii) this
combination/unification/mixing is a mental activity taking place in the
mind of the spectator. And exactly replicating the pattern this
configuration leads to the rise of the aesthetic object, which is unique
and novel in the sense that it is qualitatively different from the basic
emotion.225 By emphasizing that this aesthetic object is so called
because it constitutes the object of aesthetic relishing, Abhinavagupta
also brings out the transworldly causal efficacy (arthakriyā), inherent
in this rasa (i.e. rasa-svalakṣaṇa, to understand logically), called
rasanā or carvaṇā.226 It is obvious that Abhinavagupta is wholly
transporting Utpala’s ontological/epistemological notion of svalakṣaṇa
as an aesthetic svalakṣaṇa in the form of rasa. In so doing he exploits
the entire semantic and functional potentiality of Bharata’s idea of
saṁyoga as a bidimensional central pivot. Saṁyoga (combination),
therefore, emerges on the one hand as “perfect coordination” (samyak,
i.e. samyak yojanā) being responsible for the rise of rasa as an object,
and on the other hand as “focused one-pointedness” (aikāgrya) being
responsible for the rise of rasa as an experience (rasanā, rasānubhūti
or carvaṇā). As seems logical, saṁyoga ensures yojanā (coordination) on
the objective side (āsvādya), i.e. content of aesthetic experience, and
spontaneous freshness (apūrvatā) on the subjective side (āsvāda), i.e.
the experience itself.227 So far transworldliness or the non-ordinary
character of this experience is concerned it is not the outcome of the
productive process but a legacy from the non-ordinary character of the
determinants, etc. Thus viewed closely, Abhinavagupta’s reformulation of
Bharata’s rasa as the content of aesthetic relishing is a verbatim
restatement of Utpala’s metaphysical position where obstruction-free
awareness element (nirvighnasaṁvedana) represents prakāśa aspect,
gustation element (carvaṇā) represents camatkāra, i.e. vimarśa aspect,
constituting experience and gocaratā element (cognizability) represents
objective aspect, i.e. svalakṣaṇa, constituting content. Besides, we may
look into one more factor. Freedom from obstruction (vītavighnatā), i.e.
absolution from maculation (nirmalatā) being the defining essence of
prakāśa has been discussed in detail earlier. To this we may trace the
theory of rasa-obstacles (rasavighna), numbering seven. The main role of
the determinants, etc. is to serve as the means for elimination of these
obstacles.228 However, the secondary source for elimination of these
obstacles, particularly the seventh obstacle called “presence of doubt”
(saṁśayayoga) is ascribed to “combination” (saṁyoga). If we go back to
the notion of svalakṣaṇa in Utpala, we are instantly seized of the
catalystic role played by inter se compatibility (avirodha, ānuguṇya)
among the constituents in giving rise to a unitary consciousness. The
principle of ānuguṇya governing the mutual coordination has even
otherwise far-reaching consequences, which manifest themselves in the
aesthetic category called propriety (aucitya) constituting the most
important aspect of rasa formation (aucityopanibandhas tu rasasyopaniṣat
parā: DhĀ: 180). What is important is that avirodha, ānuguṇya or aucitya
are not contemplated as ethical or moral concepts but are raised as
ontological and logical ones.

In his notion of a unique particular (svalakṣaṇa), Utpala gives us the
ontological basis underlining universalization or generalization
(sādhāraṇīkaraṇa), a process so vital to our understanding of the rasa
experience. As I have repeatedly said, Utpala’s Vivr̥ti has come down to
us only in a very small portion and the same on ĪPK 2.3.7-8 is not
extant, yet ĪPVV on these two kārikās read with the Vivr̥ti and Vr̥tti on
1.4.2 as well as with the Vr̥tti on 2.3.8 makes it clear in no uncertain
terms that the constituent ābhāsas are universals and they owe their
particularization to delimitation caused by time and space. In other
words the intrinsic nature of an objective entity or ābhāsa remains
expanded,229 uncurtailed, i.e. universal, and it is this nature that is
grasped by determinate knowledge. We have seen that rasa experience,
though eschewing any categorization in terms of the ordinarily known
epistemic modalities, remains a kind of non-ordinary mental
determination, a vikalpa or for that matter a vimarśa-viśesa.230 As such
it grabs the universal even when it is grasping the individual by
disregarding objects’ association with time and space. Thus we are able
to notice the paradigmatic dynamics of contraction–expansion into play.
The ābhāsa, the ontological referent of epistemic operation, as such,
happens to be in the expansive, i.e. universal, mode of being, which
gets contracted as particular when touched by time and space, gets
decontracted as universal when dissociated from time and space. The
universalization becomes possible because the subjective and the
objective, the experience and the experienced, both are ontologically
universal.231

Pratibhā: The Power of Visualization

In retrospect we might go back to Pandey’s demarcating the aesthetic
domain from the epistemic in virtue of triadic relationship, the third
element being imaginative construction,232 which could be attributed to
the power of visualization. Pandey presents it as the third constituent
of aesthetic personality and calls it pratibhā: “This power of clear
visualization of the aesthetic image in all its fullness and life is
technically called pratibhā.”233 Though, as all the students of Indian
philosophy are aware, the notion of pratibhā is a pan-Indian phenomenon,
the system of Utpala does claim a profoundly superior formulation.234
Kaviraj notes four salient features of the Āgamic approach, in the main
represented by the Trika and Tripurā systems. One, in common with the
other systems that the word pratibhā literally means “flash of light”, a
revelation, and stands for wisdom characterized by immediacy and
freshness; two, it represents Highest Divinity known as Parā Saṁvit or
Citi-Śakti, the power of self-revelation and self-illumination of the
supreme spirit with which it is essentially and eternally identical;
three, it is identical with vāc and vimarśa; and four, pratibhā is
identified with the supreme subject. It is in this context that Kaviraj
cites Utpala’s ĪPK 1.7.1.235 We will notice that this kārikā remains
central to the whole of Utpalan discourse on pratibhā.

It appears that Abhinavagupta’s theorization of pratibhā has been deeply
imprinted by the two equally powerful sources of inspiration, which
despite their apparently separate origins complemented one another. One
is indeed Ānandavardhana,who seems to identify the rasa as the suggested
meaning and ascribes it to the exclusive role played by extraordinary
pratibhā which acts as the single defining factor of a great poet’s
excellence. Exegeting the same in the Locana Abhinavagupta highlights
the following aspects of genius:

(i) The poetic Muse (Sarasvatī)236 is the principle of vāc;

(ii) (thanks to vāc) the flash of genius237 (i.e. genius always bursts
as a flash of light);

(iii) shines forth to the reader with immediacy because of its being
completely informed with rasa and in this sense there is an extremely
close affinity between the experience of the audience and that of the
hero and the poet;

(iv) (and this) genius is an intelligence (prajñā) capable of creating
ever new things reminding us of his teacher’s Bhaṭṭa Tauta’s famous
statement;238 and

(v) by special genius Ānanda means a faculty which is capable of
composing poetry brimming with purity and beauty because of its
immersion in rasa.239 The greatness of a poet is gauged by the way this
special vibrating genius is expressed by the words of a poet. More or
less a similar strain is seen in the ABh also. Pratibhā is just another
name of divine principle of the supreme speech.240 It marks the first
stir or moment in the poet’s creation.241 It is of the nature of
experience characterized by immediacy and spontaneity.242

The other source is definitely Utpala. The word pratibhā in Utpala’s
diction is semantically and etymologically very rich. The root √bhā from
which the word pratibhā is derived with prefix prati conveys the sense
of both, i.e. to illuminate (bhāsana) and to appear (bhāna). Thus
combining the twin nuances of the foundational notions of prakāśa and
vimarśa, pratibhā conveys the sense of the reflective light,
counter-manifestation, luminous consciousness and is conceptualized as
revelatory apperception, intuition or even genius. As such pratibhā is
the capacity of manifesting or reflecting a thing in the consciousness
and at the same time of being reflectively aware of such a
manifestation. In other words, manifesting (bhāsana) and reposing in
consciousness (saṁvidviśrānti) go hand-in-hand in the notion of
pratibhā. Etymologically the prefix prati (again, counter, facing,
turning back) injects an element of recognition usually taking place
when an object is redirected towards consciousness or vice versa.

Endowed with such a prolific semantic legacy Utpala’s treatment of
pratibhā takes place in three directions. In the first place, in the
Vivr̥ti243 Utpala brings in the notion of pratibhā in the context of
verbal testimony (āgama) as the source of knowing. Utpala seems to
suggest that even the failure of the mental or verbal activities to pass
the test of pragmatic efficacy is due to the will of the Lord. And thus
what remains undisturbed and constant in the face of distractions by the
Obscuring Will (nirodhecchā) goes by the name of pratibhā. Exegeting
this solo citation from Utpala, Abhinavagupta takes it as enunciation of
āgama in terms of pratibhāna,which is nothing but śabda-bhāvanā (verbal
creative energy/ potential linguistic seed). In fact by deliberately
inserting the definitive expression eva (indeed) Abhinavagupta seems to
underscore the continuity of Bhartr̥hari’s pratibhā as āgama even in the
Trika system. By exegeting pratibhā as pratibhāna Abhinavagupta further
seems to highlight immediacy in the intuitive formulation of āgama.
However, this formulation is not immediately relevant from the aesthetic
point of view and may therefore be ignored at the moment.

The second direction that we notice in the Vivr̥ti, again on the
testimony of Abhinavagupta, could be said to have aesthetic
implications. Pratibhā is generally viewed as being the seminal source
of all artistic creativity. Throughout the history of literary
criticism, pratibhā unquestionably remains the principal kāvya-hetu
(source of poetry) and has been variously described as seed (bīja),
fitness or potentiality (yogyatā), trace of latent impression (saṁskāra)
or power or potency (śakti). For example Mammaṭa describes it as
kavitvabījarūpaḥ saṁskāraviśeṣaḥ. In the Vivr̥ti on ĪPK 4.1.8 (note the
Vr̥tti and Kārikā are silent) Utpala introduces the notion of seed
ultimately being reduced to a kind of residuum in the form of the
absolutic autonomy. Abhinavagupta demonstrates that Utpala is
visualizing a sort of ascending hierarchy in terms of gradual
dissolution of this potentiality through the planes of Rudra, Śiva and
Īśvara (i.e. Parama Śiva). All the worldly objects that survive only in
the condition of seeds in the plane of Rudra (representing void,
dissolution or negation) are variously described by words such as
“potentiality” (yogyatā), etc. Now this potentiality (yogyatā) that
marks the plane of duality (i.e. Rudra) gets further dissolved into
duality–non-duality (i.e. Śiva). This in turn gives rise to absolutely
abstracted state of objectivity in the God’s consciousness
(īśvarasaṁvidi) whose seedhood could only be conceptualized in terms of
the Absolutic autonomy. Hence it must be considered as a special or
particular form of potentiality.244

Developing the theme of seedhood to its logical end, Utpala seems to
have discovered the precise reason for naming this state of objectivity
as “seed” and not as “thisness” or “objectivity as such”. Had awareness
of thisness been distinct, then in all fairness the proper description
would be “all this” or “universe” and not the “universal seed” (or ’the
seed of universe’). Thus something in the form of a seed (bīja), latent
impressional trace (saṁskāra), potentiality/fitness (yogyatā) or
intrinsic prowess/potency (śakti) though always a matter of inference
for the ordinary people like us, yet capable of being distinctly
manifest to the all-knowing yogins, it always rests in I-ness or
I-consciousness (ahantā). But let there be no mistake, this I-ness is
not pure absolute I-ness but, owing to the emergence of universal
potentiality, it may be likened to the unmanifest or latent state of
each one’s respective accepted agenda for future course of action as
belonging to a sovereign, a learned scholar, a poet, an artist or an
artisan and so on. Hence in common discourse it is regarded as śakti
(power/potentiality).245 In this formulation Utpala’s central thrust is
on four aspects of pratibhā:

(i) it stands for the absolute autonomy of the artist;

(ii) it is a potentiality of a unique genre;

(iii) it resides in I-consciousness yet it is not absolute subjectivity
or I-ness, rather it is an abstracted creative potentiality embodying
the whole course of future creation in a latent but thoroughly
structured form; and

(iv) the entire objectivity in an enfolded state spells out its canvas.

However, the most important theorization of pratibhā, which could be
understood as constituting the third direction, is found in ĪPK 1.7.1
and Vr̥tti and Vivr̥ti thereon, partly resonating in ŚSĀ 12.22-23 and
18.11. The foremost question that confronts a student of Utpala is as
regards the exact motivation of Utpala. What is it that drove Utpala to
introduce the notion of pratibhā in an apparent digression from his
original formulation of consciousness as citi (consciousness),
pratyavamarśa (self-affirming consciousness) or parāvāc (supreme speech)
to viewing it as intuitive luminosity, or inner manifestive awareness
(prakāśa) moving theoretically from vimarśa to prakāśa, so to say? This
prakāśa is conceptualized as pratibhā (lit. reflective light,
counter-manifestation) generally rendered as intuition, intuitive light
or luminous consciousness. The immediate answer that one gets in the
opening remarks of Abhinavagupta, both in the ĪPV (I: 346-47) and ĪPVV
(II: 338-39) is that out of the two integral aspects of the Absolute,
Maheśvara, the vimarśa-formulation of consciousness has been primarily
addressed to the enunciation of the śakti aspect, whereas the
prakāśa-formulation is being resorted to discuss the śaktimān aspect as
constituting the sole substratum of these śaktis, i.e. powers. And the
precise reason for choosing the notion of pratibhā is that it
constitutes the intrinsic nature or defining essence (svarūpa) of that
āśraya (substratum), i.e. Maheśvara.246 Pratibhā is also chosen to
validate and logically substantiate the nature of the substrate247 (i.e.
ātman = the individual self) of the innate faculties of knowing and
acting belonging to a living individual (jñānaṁ kriyā ca bhūtānāṁ
jīvatāṁ jīvanaṁ matam — ĪPK 1.1.4). Abhinavagupta’s explanation seems to
have the backing of Utpala. Explaining the phrase ātmasaṁśrayā in the
Vivr̥ti, Abhinavagupta intends to suggest that Utpala is trying to
logically uphold Bhaṭṭa Candrānanda’s contention that pratibhā,
consisting of reflective illumination (pratīpa-bhānaṁ) of the object,
though spoken of as belonging to the object, yet its necessary repose in
the consciousness remains its ultimate true nature.248 The other
endorsement comes directly from the Saṁbandha-Siddhi of Utpala, where he
asserts that all cognitive activity relating to object, necessarily and
without exception, finds its locus in the light of Śivahood
(śivatābhāsa) which is replete with consciousness and devoid of
finitizations and invokes this particular kārikā (ĪPK1.7.1).249 In
addition, even the organizational scheme of the Kārikā text of the
seventh āhnika lends support to Abhinavagupta’s rationalization.
Maheśvara, being the final support of the powers (śaktis) is also the
final substrate of all worldly transactions (vyavahāra), maculate and
immaculate. The opening kārikā of the āhnika (i.e. 1.7.1) posits
pratibhā as constituting the precise essence of Maheśvara and depicts it
as “inlaid with the succession of myriad objects”.250 However, in the
concluding kārikā (i.e. 1.7.14) the entire predication of pratibhā is
transposed to Maheśvara251 who serves as the only locus for the direct
grasp of all the transactions getting actualized.

Let us now revert to 1.7.1252 to see as to what it says about pratibhā.
This kārikā is extremely tricky one, since all the three — the Kārikā,
the Vr̥tti and the Vivr̥ti — seem to offer three different
interpretations. For the sake of easy grasp they may be summarized as
under:

1. Kārikā: Which is this pratibhā that is the knowing subject,
Maheśvara.253

2. Vr̥tti: This pratibhā is the knowing subject and Maheśvara.254

3. Vivr̥ti:

(a) Which is this pratibhā that is the absolute (Maheśvara) knowing
subject?255

(b) Which is the knowing subject Maheśvara that is pratibhā?256

Before proceeding further let us look into Utpala’s notion of pratibhā.
Utpala has used this term once before in ĪPK 1.6.3
(tadatadpratibhābhājā). The Vr̥tti there understands it in terms of
“inner manifestive awareness that encompasses objective totality”
belonging to the knowing subject.257 Here in this kārikā the Vr̥tti
explains pratibhā as “manifestation that does subsist internally”
(antaḥsthita evābhāsaḥ).258 The citations from the Vivr̥ti do not explain
or define the word, but Abhinavagupta’s Vivr̥ti-Vimarśinī almost always
formulates it as the “inward form of the substratum (consciousness)” or
the “inward form of the manifestation” wherever the word pratibhā is
cited from the Vivr̥ti/Vr̥tti/Kārikā.259 At this point it might not be
totally off the mark to surmise that the word antarābhāsa occurring in
1.6.8260 does bear on pratibhā, though there is no direct averment to
this effect. Even the Vr̥tti thereon underlines the conceptual
affinity.261 I also believe that Abhinavagupta’s formulation in terms of
“introvert form of manifestation” is a legacy from Utpala himself if we
care to recapitulate what Utpala has said in the Saṁbandha-Siddhi262
while citing 1.7.1. One can also notice the imprint of Dharmakīrti on
the mode of presentation.

The notion of pratibhā is a strong strategic mechanism in the Śaiva
armour. In its immanent aspect (viśvamayatā), Śiva constitutes the whole
world-creation as externalization of the internal, hence the entire
world must subsist within Śiva. While autonomy of consciousness is the
tool for externalizing the internal, the inner manifestive
consciousness, i.e. pratibhā, constitutes the nature of the ground
consciousness so as to lend ontological authenticity to even the
external which is essentially internal. Since pratibhā is the plenary
ground consciousness, it is capable of providing the berth for even
constructing the “other” or “not-that” (atad) as contradistinguished
from “that” (tad) and thereby accounting for not only perceptual but
also determinate cognition.263

Therefore the central thrust of the Kārikā lies in equating intrinsicity
of the external manifestation with the knowing subject, i.e. the self,
that is what constitutes essential nature, and that is what goes by the
name of Lordliness (aiśvarya).264 According to the Kārikā, the beauty of
this inner manifestive awareness is that though it is impressed with the
succession of entire objectivity it remains identical with the knowing
subject which is devoid of succession, delimitation and consists of
consciousness. This knowing subject is the Supreme Lord, i.e.
Maheśvara.265

The instance in the Vr̥tti is substantially altered. The Vr̥tti does away
with the subject yā (which) [i.e. pratibhā] about which the predicate
saḥ (he/that) makes affirmation or predication (i.e. pramātā,
maheśvaraḥ).266 Rather it is focused on highlighting the intended
outcome, i.e. purport (phalanirūpaṇa), of the Kārikā. By purposely
inserting definitive particle eva the Vr̥tti can now speak of the total
identity of the internally resting light imprinted with the succession
of the entire objective variety with the knowing subject, the “self” in
our common parlance, for two reasons: that it pervades the time span of
the entire gamut of cognitions and that it consists of consciousness
eschewing succession and delimitation. The same is Maheśvara by virtue
of his being the creator of the object(s) of cognition(s) [prameya] that
constitutes his limbs.

One can see that this is a very complex and comprehensive theorization
of pratibhā which encompasses both the dimensions of consciousness
subjective as well as agential, cognitive as well as creative. It also
encompasses the individual self and the macrocosmic Self, Maheśvara. The
internally subsisting light of all objects transpires to be both the
knowing self, ātman, in virtue of its being the knower and pervader of
all cognitions throughout their temporal subsistence and Maheśvara in
virtue of being the author of all the objects of cognitions constituting
His own body or limbs. In the ĪPVV, exegeting the Vivr̥ti, Abhinavagupta
wants the reader to comprehend the precise implication of the phrases
ābhāsa eva ātma and sarvasaṁvitkālavyāpī and the compound tattat°, etc.
in the Vr̥tti, namely that this inward manifestation of all the objects
within the intuitive light inlaid with their respective succession is
not an ontological proposition for viewing the universal objectivity as
the expansion of the Lord’s power (tacchakti-vikāsa), but a cognitive,
recognitive to be more precise, mode of the discovery of powers
(śaktyāviṣkaraṇa) consisting in the successive manifestation
(avabhāsana) and manifestation preceded by creation (nirmāṇapūrvaka
ābhāsana) as dwelt in detail by the immediately preceding two kārikās,
e.g. 1.6.9 and 1.6.10.267 By underlining this connectivity Abhinavagupta
suggests that Utpala is able to account for novelty268 or newness with
each instance of manifestation and thereby to provide the logical basis
for the phenomenon of ever arising newness with pratibhā. In fact, what
Abhinavagupta wants to emphasize is that both knowing and creating are
possible only with reference to avabhāsana (manifestation) and not with
reference to pure light.269 In pratibhā, it is possible as all objects
are internally manifest.

The Vivr̥ti once again changes the main stance of the Kārikā and proposes
two different but complementary syntactical constructions. In the first
formulation the Vivr̥ti dissolves the compound into two, e.g. akramā and
anantacidrūpaḥ.270 Abhinavagupta follows Vivr̥ti in his Vimarśinī in
separating akramā from ananta°.271 The akramā refers to pratibhā meaning
thereby that though intuitive light is coloured by succession of the
objective manifestation, it is trans-sequential in itself. As against
Kārikā272 and Vr̥tti,273 in the Vivr̥ti Maheśvara describes or qualifies
pramātā.274 Thus pratibhā is Maheśvara pramātā because it constitutes
the introvert essence and thereby establishes the substratum.275 This
formulation is duly adopted by Abhinavagupta in his Vimarśinī.276 As
regards the second formulation,277 the Vivr̥ti is seized with the problem
as to why the Kārikā has pronoun saḥ (he) in masculine gender referring
to pratibhā which is introduced with the pronoun yā (who) in the
feminine gender. Utpala’s search for an answer ends with reversing the
order of the Kārikā in order to bring out its inherent thrust: now
pramatā and maheśvara could be viewed as pratibhā.278 This formulation
forcefully presents intuitive light in its fully developed form as duly
nourished by the knowing subjectivity and absolute autonomy. The
allusion to pratibhā in the masculine is to highlight full nourishment
of pratibhā.279 In this conceptualization, one can notice the seeds of
the two modes of pratibhā: the bhāvayitrī (appreciative genius) and
kārayitrī (creative genius), widely subscribed to by the large number of
literary critics.

The idea of pratibhā as light illuminating entire objectivity is a
continuing theme with Utpala. In the eighteenth song of the ŚSĀ, Utpala
visualizes the Lord as pratibhāmaya (consisting of light) Who reveals
Himself to all living beings as light in all things.280 What makes the
invocation interesting is its directness and capacity to strike a close
personal bond. In the two verses of the twelfth song called
rahasyanirdeśa (speaking of the mystery), Utpala spells out the
following characteristics of pratibhā:281

(i) pratibhā represents appreciative insight or semantic insight282
arising on listening to the profound statements — this marks the first
step leading to the rise of competence;

(ii) the second step relates to realizing the meaning in practice (habit
of uninterrupted worshipping);

(iii) the third step represents the accomplishment of the listener’s
purpose; and

(iv) the fourth stage represents dawn of luminous reality as
constituting the essence of objects interacted with.283

Without elaborating I will draw the reader’s attention to
Abhinavagupta’s discussion under 1.1.1 for a comparative overview on how
a meaning is generated and then communicated.284

Insights in Music

Another significant part of Utpala’s contribution in aesthetics is
related to music, some aspects of which were initially discussed in the
beginning of this paper.285 As I have been saying, our only source of
information remains Abhinavagupta. The information gathered from some
other sources already mentioned earlier does not throw any specific
light on his theoretical insights. The material available in the form of
allusions, citations and some Abhinavan observations in the ABh portray
him as a gifted musicologist, a master theorist about the technique and
practice of music, both vocal and instrumental, but offers no clue to
his views on dance or the philosophy of music. The ancient concept of
music comprised all the three elements: vocal, instrumental and
dance.286 Utpala, indeed, was conversant with dance form (besides vocal
music) as is clear from his ŚSĀ,287 but there is no evidence that he
ever theorized about them. As regards his philosophy of music we are in
the realm of sheer conjecture, perhaps only two observations, without
much fear of incongruity might be made. In the first place, music too
would fall under the rubric of the spotless, immaculate transaction
(nirmala vyavahāra) in virtue of its being a cultural activity, and in
the second place, this would of necessity be viewed as an outflow of
Parā Vāc, the supreme speech, in its alternative conceptualization as
nāda or paranāda, resonance or supreme resonance, undergoing the
identical quadripartite evolution through parā, paśyantī, madhyamā and
vaikharī as extensively shown and nurtured by Abhinavagupta in the third
āhnika of the Tantrāloka.288

Since I lack core competence that is required for a critical evaluation
of Utpala’s specific contribution to music, my role in this section
remains virtually compendious and compilatory. Precisely it was for this
very reason that the geyādhikāra (chapters 28-36) that is the “Book on
Music” of the NŚ and Abhinavagupta’s commentary thereon have largely
remained unattended to this day in any language.289 In the
Abhinavabhāratī, overall Utpala or his views have been mentioned seven
times.

The first reference is found in the 28th āhnika devoted to the
discussion of jātis and its characterstics (lakṣaṇas). Bharata has
initiated discussion on the sādhāraṇa, i.e. the interval that exists
between the two overlapping notes. Out of the two sādhāraṇas —
jātī-sādhāraṇa and svara-sādhāraṇa — the latter is of two types: kākalī
and antarasvara, and of both the grāmas.290 In order to show the
difference of opinions and that he abides by the opinion expressed by
his grand-teacher Utpaladeva, Abhinavagupta invokes the views of
Utpala.291 According to Anupa Pande, Utpala held that the svaras have
two kinds of forms, prākr̥tā and vaikr̥tā (natural and deformed). Any of
the notes may acquire a deformation or vikr̥ti. But she cautions that
“this idea is not clearly mentioned in the text. It seems to foreshadow
the medieval practice, only the distortion here presupposed the system
of grāmas and mūrcchanā and not a fixed tonic with varying thāṭs”.292

Going forward, Bharata in NŚ 28.64-65 holds that jātis based on notes
should never be made auḍuvitā. But in jātis the destruction (i.e.
omission) of all notes is prescribed. However, madhyama is never to be
made a destructible (i.e. one which can be omitted) note. The
indestructible madhyama, therefore, is to be remembered as the most
important of all notes in the law of gāndharva and sāman.293 However,
according to Abhinavagupta, Dattila, Viśākhilācārya and some others did
not agree with Bharata. Instead they held that dhaivata was
indispensable in the ṣaḍja grāma, pañcama in madhyama grāma and madhyama
in both the grāmas.294 It is at this point Abhinavagupta cites Utpala to
underscore the irrelevance of these contesting viewpoints and clarify
Bharata’s prescription.295

According to Lath, this is an extremely valuable observation by Utpala.
In order to bring out its full significance he refers to it twice in his
important work. Since Utpala’s view was cited in the context of Dattila
and Viśākhila who took a variant stand from Bharata, Lath has the
following comment to make:

Two other notes besides the madhyama were indispensable in gāndharva,
though in a more limited sense: pañcama was indispensable in the
madhyama-grāma and dhaivata in the ṣaḍja-grāma. The reason is again
obscure. Perhaps there was no reason; it just so happened that in the
limited number of melodies accepted in gāndharva pañcama was never
actually dropped from jātis of the madhyama-grāma and similarly dhaivata
was always found to be used in jātis of the ṣaḍja-grāma. The rule that
these notes should not be dropped could be a generalization of musical
practice and not a rule governing structures. This is what Utpaladeva
has suggested.296

Later, he continues:

Utpaladeva has suggested that madhyama was called indispensable in jātis
because it just happened to be only note which was never actually
dropped. There seems to be quite some truth in this observation, because
in many jāti-born forms which shared a common musical scheme with the
jātis, madhyama could be dropped.297

Raghavan298 draws our attention to Utpala’s view which is cited under NŚ
29.28. The 29th adhyāya deals with the instrumental music relating to
the stringed instrument. According to Bharata, the musical figures
consisting of svaras, in theatric songs (dhruvās), generate excessive
charm when they are ascending and not confined to themselves.299 The
ascending svaras (ārohiṇaḥ svarāḥ) are those whose ascendance is
directly visible. Their excessive charm is due to the fact that each
syllable (akṣara) accompanies each svara and each svara accompanies each
syllable (akṣara).300 This was the view which was upheld by Utpala
against those who believed that the musical figures consisting of svaras
ought to be restricted to only a particular part.

Immediately hereafter Utpala’s authority is again invoked under NŚ
29.30. It is referred to by Pandey301 and Raghavan302 both. According to
Pandey the context relates to the ornaments (alaṁkāra) of song. Pandey
is right, since according to the context the musical figures consisting
of svaras here pertain to the second variety involving songs. Utpala is
cited in order to eliminate any doubt that even within the given context
of song-presentation (gītāprayoga) the musical figures that are solely
based on varṇas, by virtue of being constituents of the words (pada) (of
a melody), relate to svarālāpa alone and not to the rendering of the
song as such. The semblance of musical figure in a song is only a
derivative product of the residual impression of varṇas and hence
considered secondary.303

Relying upon the phrase vyācakṣate in the next citation Pandey suspects
that probably Utpala was a commentator of the NŚ or “on some parts of
it” (Pandey 1959: 540) which was debated by Raghavan (1981: 122). He
surmised that Utpala interpreted Bharata’s text, i.e. the last line of
the NŚ 31.26 (trayo bhedā hi tālasya dviguṇād [dviguṇā Raghavan]
dviguṇāḥ smr̥tāḥ), in the former’s independent work on music, an issue
which we have already visited at the outset of this paper. I am however
in favour of treading the middle path. Whether or not Utpala wrote an
independent work on music, Abhinavagupta’s copious allusions to him from
the opening chapter (i.e. 28th chapter) of the Geyādhikāra through 32nd
chapter as an authority whom he broadly follows, makes it a sensible
proposition to believe that Utpala might have commented upon the
Nāṭyasāstra’s section on music or at least a sizeable portion of it. Let
us leave the issue at that. Raghavan highlights one more significance of
this citation, i.e. to show that Abhinavagupta was not a blind follower
of his grand-teacher: on occasions he also used to differ from him.

Utpala’s statement and Abhinavagupta’s disagreement or corrective review
comes in the ABh on NŚ 31.26,304 which discusses the basic
tāta-structures in gāndharva music. Yathākṣara (lit. “corresponding to
the number of syllables”: sarvathākṣarasaṁkhyayā tulyā — ABh IV: 162) is
the technical name for the basic tāla-units. Caccatputaḥ305 and
cācapuṭaḥ are the two basic tāla-prototypes or yathākṣaras. Bharata
calls them yonidvaya (NŚ 31.7), because they were the base on which
other tāla or kalā modes were constructed.306 The terms caccatpuṭaḥ and
cācapuṭaḥ, meaningless by themselves, constituted word formulas (pada)
which, when analysed letterwise (akṣara) and metrically on the basis of
mātrās contained in each syllable, yielded the basic prototype of the
yugma and ayugma modes of grouping kalās. The yathākṣara syllabic
arrangement in yugma (caccatpuṭaḥ) was — guru, guru, laghu, laghu, pluta
and the pattern of tāla in terms of kalās was: one kalā + one kalā +
half a kalā + one and a half kalā. This pattern was to be applied in the
ekakala mode. Bharata gives three alternative beat arrangements (NŚ
31.11-15) for the caccatpuṭaḥ (yugma mode). The first alternative he
calls the śuddha alternative (NŚ 31.117), the only beat formation that
was further expanded with the addition of other beats to form dvikala
and catuṣkala modes. Kalā signified a unit of time. The five nimeṣa
mātrā was the standard of measuring kalā as a time unit in gāndharva. In
order to render an ekakala yathākṣara tāla into a dvikala, number of
metric yathākṣara mātrās were doubled and divided uniformly in terms of
gurus instead of the divisions into pluta, laghu, etc.: ‘ekā prakr̥tir
iti’ । gururūpo yo bhedaḥ so ’traikasvabhāve
laghuplutādicchedavibhāgaśūnyaḥ so ’tra prakr̥tir mūlabhūtaḥ (ABh on NŚ
31.7). Each guru as before was equal to one kalā; but in dvikalā two
such kalās made a single unit accounting for the mode’s naming as
dvikala. One unit of two kalās in the dvikala mode was termed the
padabhāga, and four such padabhāgas made a larger unit of tāla called
mātrā, which term in this sense had a strict technical connotation
confined to tāla-structures in gāndharva. The dvikala padabhāga had two
kalās. The catuṣkala was double the dvikala: dvirbhāvād dvikalasyāpi
vijñeyo ’tha catuṣkalaḥ । (NŚ 31.40). It had four kalās. Consequently,
the total number of kalās in a catuṣkala caccatpuṭaḥ was sixteen (4
padabhāgas of 4 kalās each).307

According to Abhinavagupta, the precise intention of Bharata is to show
that doubling (dvaiguṇya) of metric yathākṣara mātrās was the sole
factor for distinguishing the three mārgas, and not the tempo etc. as
such. Bharata speaks of three layas (tempos), viz. druta (fast), madhya
(medium) and vilambita (slow). These corresponded to the three mārgas:
citra mārga (druta laya), vr̥tta or vārttika mārga was in madhya laya
(medium tempo) and the dakṣiṇa mārga related to vilambita laya (slow
tempo). In the three mārgas there were three different styles of
applying the kalās. Thus in the citra mārga, the mode of
kalā-application was ekakala, in the vr̥tta mārga it was dvikala and in
the dakṣiṇa mārga it was catuṣkala.308 But what separated the three
mārgas was the doubling and on this ground even ekakala, that is,
principal yathākṣara mode, would also attract doubling. But a section of
musicologists differed. In their opinion, the first type, i.e. ekakala
or citra mārga alone, could boast of doubling proper, whereas the
remaining two, viz. dvikala and catuṣkala, for that matter vr̥tta and
dakṣiṇa mārgas, could be said to have doubling in successive order
(kramadviguṇau). It is only in this sense that all the tāla structures
could be said to be double (dviguṇa). It is at this point that Utpala’s
view is alluded to. Utpala had different explanation. According to him
though the precise reason for holding tālas to be of three kinds (viz.
ekakala, dvikala and catuṣkala) was due to mutually partaking of their
threefold character in between themselves, their threefold modal
outgrowth depended on the process or phenomenon called doubling. In
fact, the word yathākṣara owes its usage to the letterwise metrical
correspondence of the basic tāla pattern, hence by single doubling of
the metric yathākṣara mātrās (i.e. in ekakala mode) it could be expanded
into dvikala and by two doublings into catuṣkala (because the two kalās
in dvikala mode formed a single unit and two dvikalas formed a
catuṣkala). By virtue of being catuṣkala, and their being no more
divisions, there was no further multiplication. This view of Utpala
evoked a somewhat discordant note from Abhinavagupta who seems to extend
the scope of doubling to vīṇā (Indian lute) as well by ruling out
impossibility of doubling in the vīṇā.309

The next quote to which attention is drawn by Pandey310 and Raghavan311
occurs in the ABh on NŚ 32.4-6. The 32nd chapter deals with theatric
songs, i.e. dhruvā.312 Pandey notes the dhruvā connection of this quote.
Just in the immediately preceding verses, Bharata has laid down that the
components of the saptarūpa or gītakas, suitably transformed, resulted
in the dhruvās.313 Once transformed into dhruvās these gītaka components
acquired independent forms with their own character. Yet as explained by
Abhinava, there remained a cause and effect relationship between the old
and the new formations. Hence the components of the gītakas which had a
particular arrangement ordained for the achievement of adr̥ṣṭa, could be
reorganized with a new end in view: they could be suitably regrouped to
express rasas and moods. They were to this end, reorganized according to
the metrical structure of the song being sung. In this new regrouping, a
causal relation with the original gītaka composition, though present,
was not immediately perceived. The new group, moreover, could become the
base for futher formations.314

In the kārikās under current reference, i.e. NŚ 32.4-6, Bharata hands
out a list of such gītaka components converted into dhruvās such as
mukha saying that these formed the limbs of all the five types of
dhruvās and giving details of their specific functional use at the
different dramatic moments on the stage.315 The phala or end result of
an object (i.e. the purpose it serves, the fruit it bears) is connected
with its function which Abhinavagupta calls its dharma.316 The function
of gītakas, turned and transformed into dhruvās, was closely connected
with nāṭya. As to the doubt, what would be the end result of these
gītaka components — seen (dr̥ṣṭa), that is, identical with that of
dhruvās, or unseen (adr̥ṣṭa), that is which is present as a cause but is
not actually felt, i.e. one identical with the former gītakas.
Abhinavagupta thinks both the options — simultaneous pursuit of the
collective fruits or going in for either fruit alternatively — would be
futile because of attendant anomalies. Hence he resorts to the final
dictum of his grand-teacher Utpaladevapāda, who squarely held that their
precise purpose/function/end result was to evince their absolute
dependence upon or inspiration from their causal former status,
characterized by enduring continuity due to which they are transformed
into dhruvās and can be so discerned by the wise (prajñaḥ prakalpayet)
or by sharp intellect (prajñopakalpayet). The reason — dhruvā being an
effect, a product (kārya) — the original characterstic (dharma) inheres
in it like its cause.317

Incidently the last quote I could lay my hands on is found in the ABh on
NŚ 32.414.318 The kārikā and Abhinavagupta’s commentary are absolutely
technical and I have not been able to understand them.319 The 32nd
chapter deals with dhruvās and the kārikā under reference is from that
section of the chapter which particularly handles the method of
performing dhruvās (dhruvāprayoga). Bharata intends to initiate
discussion about how and when avanaddha instruments are to be used in
course of performing dhruvās320 in the pūrvaraṅga. Prāveśikī, as is
evident from the name, was used to indicate the entry of the characters
on the stage. According to Bharata the three encirclings (circular
movements, parivarta) were to be performed without the accompaniment of
the avanaddha instrument. It was only in the fourth encirclement
(parivarta) that the use of the avanaddha instrument was to be resorted
to. Abhinavagupta notes that it was Bharata’s view, because there were
others who enjoyed bhāṇḍa-less performance only in the initial circular
round, the next three were to be accompanied with bhāṇḍa (i.e. avanaddha
instrument).321 The question that with bhāṇḍa in use what was the
specific beat to begin the dhruvā singing was answered by the kārikā we
are directly concerned with. There could be one of three approaches
described as sannipātagraha, tarjanīgraha or ākāśagraha. The first
sounded beat was formed with both hands synchronously, the second by the
rhythmic strikings of the index finger and the third was a kind of empty
(comparable to khālī in modern Indian singing) beating, i.e. sounded
beating devoid of any specific lakṣaṇa. Abhinavagupta refers to the
existence of two contesting opinions in this regard. Some stated that
sannipātagraha was the proper beating for ekakalatāla, ākāśagraha for
dvikalatāla and tarjanīgraha for catuṣkalatāla. However, Abhinavagupta
firmly abided with the interpretation of Utpaladeva, his grand-teacher,
who held that bhāṇḍagraha precisely applied to singing (as if)
descending from ether, i.e. nothing, in the absence of precise guiding
rule as regards the specific tāla mode such as ekakala.322

Knowing fully well that these pages by no means exhaust Utpala’s
aesthetic insights in totality, I have to close it for now. I firmly
believe that there is enough in Utpala that needs to be explored
further. For instance Pandey makes an extremely important observation323
with regard to Abhinavagupta’s theory of aesthetics that in aesthetic
experience it is not the emotive aspect but the mental that has
preponderance and explains it in the light of Abhinavagupta’s treatment
in the ABh. However, I find that the seeds of this thesis could be
traced to Utpala. Similarly, it will be interesting to see as to what
Utpala has to say on beauty as an object, more so because aesthetic
experience is essentially beauty experience. I very much wanted to work
and enlarge on these issues but they need to form the subject matter of
some future paper.

* When professors Torella and Bäumer graciously asked me to contribute a
paper on Utpaladeva’s contribution and suggested that I revisit my paper
on error (“Theory of Error According to Abhinavagupta”, JIPh, 14, 1986),
I instead opted for exploring Utpala’s contribution to aesthetics, if
any. Little did I realize then that the area I chose demanded a lot more
than I could possibly give to it.

Abbreviations and Bibliography

Texts

Abhinavagupta, Abhinavabhāratī on the Nāṭyaśāstra [ABh], [see Bharata].

———, Īśvarapratyabhijñā of Utpaladeva with the Vimarśinī of
Abhinavagupta [ĪPV(KSS)], vols. I and II, ed. M.S. Kaul Shāstrī, KSTS
XXII-XXXIII, Bombay, 1918-21.

———, Īśvarapratyabhijñāvimarśinī [ĪPV]. [See Bhāskarakaṇṭha, Bhāskarī.]

———, Īśvarapratyabhijñāvivr̥tivimarśinī [ĪPVV/or Br̥hatī Vimarśinī], ed.
M.S. Kaul Shāstrī, vols. I-III, KSTS LX/LXII/ LXV, Bombay, 1938-43.

———, Locana on Dhvanyāloka [DhĀL] [see Ānandavardhana].

———, Parātriṁśikāvivaraṇa [PTV], ed. M.R. Shāstrī, KSTS XVIII, Bombay,
1918 [see Jaidev Singh].

———, Śrīmadbhagavadgītā with the commentary Gītārthasaṁgraha [BhGAS],
edited with notes by Pandit Lakshman Raina Brahmachārī, Srinagar, 1933.

———, Tantrāloka [TĀ] with the Viveka [TĀV] of Jayaratha, 8 vols.,
enlarged edition, eds. R.C. Dwivedi and Navajivan Rastogi, vol. I
(Introduction) by Navajivan Rastogi, Delhi, 1987.

Ānandavardhana, Dhvanyāloka [DhĀ] with Vyākhyā of Abhinavagupta [DhĀL],
eds. Durgaprasad and Kashinath Panduranga Parab, repr. 1983 (from 1935
edition of Nirnayasagar Press), Delhi, 1983 [see Ingalls and Pathak].

———, Dhvanyāloka and Locana with Kaumudī by Uttuṅgodaya and Upalocana by
Kuppusvami Śāstrī [Kaumudī on DhĀL], Uddyota I, eds. S. Kuppuswami
Sastri, T.V.R. Dikṣitar, T.R. Chintamani, Madras, 1944.

Bharata, Nāṭyaśāstra of Bharatamuni [NŚ] with the commentary
Abhinava-Bhāratī [ABh], in 4 volumes: vols. 1-3 edited by M. Ramakrishna
Kavi and vol. 4 by M. Ramakrishna Kavi and J.S. Pade), vol. I (chaps.
1-7), 2nd revised edn., ed. K.S. Ramaswami Sastri, GOS-XXXVI, Baroda,
1956; vol. II (chaps. 8-18), 2nd revised edn., eds. V.M. Kulkarni and
Tapasvi Nandi, GOS-68, Baroda, 2001; vol. III (chaps. 19-27), 2nd
revised edn., eds. same, GOS-124, Baroda, 2003; vol. IV (chaps. 28-37),
2nd revised edn., eds. same, (with slight variation, Tapasvi Nandi’s
name appears as T.S. Nandi), GOS-145, Baroda, 2006.

Bhartr̥hari, Vākyapadīya of Bhartr̥hari [VP] with the Vr̥tti and the
Paddhati of Vr̥ṣabhadeva, Kāṇḍa I, ed. K.A.S. Iyer, Poona 1966.

Bhāskarakaṇṭha [Bhāskara], Bhāskarī [Bhās.]. A commentary of
Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vimarśinī of Abhinavagupta [ĪPV], vols. I-II, ed.
K.A.S. Iyer and K.C. Pandey, The Princes of Wales Saraswati Bhavana
Texts Nos. 70-83, Allahabad, 1938-50.

Bhaṭṭa Nārāyaṇa, Stavacintāmaṇi [SC] with Vivr̥ti by Kṣemarāja
[SC-Vivr̥ti], ed. M.R. Shastri, KSTS X, Srinagar, 1918.

Dharmakīrti, Pramāṇavārttika [PV] with the commentary Vr̥tti of Acharya
Manorathanandin, critically edited by Swami Dwarikadas Shastri,
Varanasi, 1968.

Jayaratha, Tantrālokaviveka [TĀV] (see Tantrāloka under Abhinavagupta).

———, Alaṁkārasarvasva-vimarśinī [AS-Vimarśinī] [see Ruyyaka].

Kṣemarāja, Nirṇaya on Spandakārikā [SK] [see Vasugupta].

———, Vimarśinī on Śivasūtra [see Vasugupta].

———, Vivr̥ti on Śivastotrāvalī [ŚSĀ-Vivr̥ti] [see Utpaladeva].

———, Vivr̥ti on Stavacintāmaṇi [SC-Vivr̥ti] [see Bhaṭṭa Nārāyaṇa].

Kālidāsa, Abhijñānaśākuntalam [AŚ], in Kālidāsa-granthāvalī, ed. R.P.
Dvivedi, Varanasi, 1976.

Mammaṭa, Kāvyaprakāśa [KP] (see Kane).

Ruyyaka, Alaṁkārasarvasva [AS] of Rājānaka Ruyyaka with the commentary
(Vimarśinī) of Jayaratha [AS-Vimarśinī], ed. Paṇḍit Girijāprasād
Dvivedi, 2nd edn., Kāvyamālā 35, Bombay, 1939.

Somānanda, Śivadr̥ṣti [ŚD] with the Vr̥tti by Utpaladeva [ŚD-Vr̥tti], ed.
M.S. Kaul Shastri, KSTS No. LIV, Srinagar, 1934 [see Utpaladeva].

Śrīvidyācakravartin, Alaṁkārasarvasva-sañjīvinī, ed/tr. (Hindi) R.C.
Dwivedi, Delhi, 1965.

Utpaladeva, Siddhitrayī [Ajaḍapramātr̥siddhi with the Vr̥tti by Harabhaṭṭa
Śāstrī; Īśvarasiddhi; Saṁbandhasiddhi [SS]; all under the title
Siddhitrayī] .

———, (and) Pratyabhijñā-kārikā-Vr̥tti, ed. (with notes) M.S. Kaul
Shastri, KSS, XXXIV, Srinagar, 1921.

———, The Śivastotrāvalī (ŚSĀ) with the Vivr̥ti of Kṣemarāja [ŚSĀ-Vivr̥ti],
ed. with Hindi commentary by Rājānaka Lakṣmaṇa, Chowkhamba Sanskrit
Series, no. 15, Varanasi, 1964.

———, The Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikā of Utpaladeva [ĪPK] with the Author’s
Vr̥tti [ĪPVr̥/Torella1994], critical edition and annotated translation,
R.Torella, Serie Orientale Roma, LXXI, Rome, 1994.

———, Śivadr̥ṣṭi-Vr̥tti (Padasaṅgati) [ŚD-Vr̥tti] (see Śivadr̥ṣti under
Somānanda).

———, Īśvarapratyabhijñāvivr̥ti [Vivr̥ti] [see ĪPVV underAbhinavagupta
/Torella 2007a-b-c].

Vasugupta, Śiva-Sūtra [ŚS] ascribed to Vasugupta, in Śivasūtravimarśinī
by Kṣemarāja, ed. J.C. Chatterjee, KSTS I, Srinagar, 1911.

———, Spandakārikās (SK) of Vasugupta with the Nirṇaya by Kṣemarāja,
ed/tr. M.S. Kaul Shastri, KSTS XLII, Srinagar, 1925.

Vijñāna-Bhairava [VBh] with the Uddyota by Kṣemarāja up to verse 23 and
with the Vivr̥ti by Śivopādhyāya thereafter, ed. M.R. Shastri, KSTS VIII,
Bombay, 1918.

Translations and Studies

Bailly, C.R., 1987, Shaiva Devotional Songs of Kashmir: A Translation
and Study of Utpaladeva’s Śivastotrāvalī, SUNY series, Albany.

Bhattacharya, K.C., 1958, Studies in Philosophy, vol. II, ed. Gopinath
Bhattacharya, Calcutta.

Brihaspati, Kailash Chandradeva, 1991, Bharata Kā Saṅgīta Siddhānta,
Hindi Samiti Granthamāla 28, 2nd edn., Lucknow.

Chaturvedi, R.S., 1986, The Śivadr̥ṣṭi of Śrī Somānanda Nātha with the
Vr̥tti of Śrī Utpaladeva, edited with Sanskrit Commentary and Hindi
translation, Varanasi.

Das, S.K. (ed.), 1996, The English Writings of Rabindranath Tagore, vol.
2, New Delhi: Sahitya Akademi.

Gnoli, R., 1957, “Śivadr̥ṣṭi by Somānanda”, East and West, 8.

———, 1959, “Vāc. II secondo capitolo della Śivadr̥ṣṭi di Somānanda”,
Rivista degli Studi Orientali, 34.

———, 1968, The Aesthetic Experience according to Abhinavagupta,
Chowkhamba Sanskrit Studies, vol. LXII, 2nd edn., Varanasi.

Ingalls, D.H.H. (ed.), 1990, The Dhvanyāloka of Ānandavardhana with the
Locana of Abhinavagupta, tr. D.H.H. Ingalls, J.M. Masson and M.V.
Patwardhan, edited with an Introduction by D.H.H. Ingalls, Harvard
Oriential Series, 49, Harvard (MSS) and London.

Iyer, K.A.S., 1964, The Vākyapadīya of Bhartr̥hari with the Vr̥tti Chapter
1, English translation, Poona: Deccan College.

———, 1969, Bhartr̥hari. A Study of the Vākyapadīya in the Light of the
Ancient Commentaries, Poona: Deccan College.

Janaki, Kumari S.S., 1965, Alaṁkāra-Sarvasva of Ruyyaka, with the
Sañjīvanī Commentary of Vidyācakravartin, Text and Study by Kumari S.S.
Janaki, Delhi.

Kane, P.V., 1951, The Sāhitya-Darpaṇa of Viśvanātha (Paricchedas I, II,
X Arthālaṁkāras), with exhaustive Notes and the History of Sanskrit
Poetics, 3rd edn., Bombay.

Kaviraj, G.N. [Kaviraj, Gopinath], 1933, “Kāśmīrīya Śaiva Darśana kī
kucha Viśeṣatāyeṅ”, in Kalyāṇa, Śivāṅka, vol. 8, Gita Press, Gorakhpur
(Saṁ. 1990), 1933: reprinted in Bhāratīya Saṁskr̥ti aura Sādhanā, vol. 1,
Patna, 1963.

———, 1924, “The Doctrine of Pratibhā in Indian Philosophy”, ABORI,
1923-24, Poona: reprinted in Aspects of Indian Thought, 1966, 2nd edn.,
Burdwan, 1984.

Kaw, R.K., 1967, The Doctrine of Recognition (Pratyabhijñā Philosophy),
Vishveshvaranand Institute Series, no. 40, Hoshiarpur.

———, 1975-76, Pratyabhijñākārikā of Utpaladeva, parts I-II, Sharada
Peetha Indological Research Series, nos. 11-12, Srinagar.

Kotru, N.K., 1985, Śivastotrāvalī of Utpaladeva, Sanskrit Text with
Introduction, English Translation and Glossary, Delhi.

Lath, M.,1978, A Study of Dattilam: A Treatise on the Sacred Music of
Ancient India, New Delhi.

Masson, J.L. and M.V. Patwardhana, 1969, Śāntarasa and Abhinavagupta’s
Philosophy of Aesthetics, Poona: BORI.

Pande, Anupa, 1997, Abhinavabhāratī (Abhinavagupta’s Commentary on
Bharata’s Nāṭyaśāstra Chapter XXVIII: English Translation with
Historical Critical Explanations), Allahabad.

Pandey, K.C., 1935, Abhinavagupta: An Historical and Philosophical
Study, Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Studies, vol. I, Varanasi.

———, 1950, Comparative Aesthetics, vol. I: Indian Aesthetics, Chowkhamba
Sanskrit Series Studies, vol. II, Varanasi.

———, 1959, Comparative Aesthetics, vol. I: Indian Aesthetics, 2nd edn.,
Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Studies, vol. II, Varanasi.

———, 1963, Abhinavagupta: An Historical and Philosophical Study, 2nd
edn. revised and enlarged, Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Studies, vol. I,
Varanasi.

Pathak, Jagannath, 2003, Dhvanyaloka of Sri Anandavardhanacharya with
the Lochana Sanskrit Commentary of Sri Abhinavagupta and the Prakasa
Hindi Translation of Both the Texts and Exhaustive Notes, repr. edn.,
Vidyabhawan Sanskrit Granthmala, no. 97, Varanasi.

Raghavan, V., 1981, Abhinavagupta and His Works, Chaukhamba Oriential
Research Studies, no. 20, Varanasi.

Rastogi, N., 1977-78, “Recognition in Pratyabhijñā School: A Study in
Epistemology”, Annals of Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute (Diamond
Jubilee Volume), 58: 841-61.

———, 1986, “Theory of Error according to Abhinavagupta”, Journal of
Indian Philosophy, 14: 1-33.

———, 1987, “Gopinath Kaviraj on Kashmir Śaivism”, in Navonmeṣa: M.M.
Gopinath Kaviraj Commemoration Volume, eds. Jaideva Singh, G.G.
Mukhopadhyaya and H.N. Chakravorty, Varanasi, pp. 30-57.

———, 2009, “Vak as Pratyavamarśa: Bhartr̥hari from Abhinavan
Perspective”, in Bhartr̥hari: Language, Thought and Reality, (Proceedings
of the International Seminar, Delhi, 12-14 December 2003), ed. Mithilesh
Chaturvedi, Delhi, pp. 301-41.

———, 2012, Abhinavagupta kā Tantrāgamīya Darśana:
Itihāsa-Saṁskr̥ti-Saundarya aura Tattva-cintana,
Dārśanika-cintana-sr̥jana-granthamālā: 3 of the Akhila Bhartiya Darshan
Parishad, Sagar.

———, “Abhinavagupta kī Saundarya-dr̥ṣti”, in Rastogi 2012: 363-98.

———, “Pratibhāna aura Rasānubhava”, in Rastogi 2012: 299-420.

———, (2013a) Kāśmīra Sivādyavāda meṁ Pramāṇa-cintana, ed. Jitendra B.
Shah. Ahmedabad: L.D. Institute of Indology.

———, “Quintessentiality of Camatkāra in Rasa-experience: Revisiting
Abhinavagupta” in Rastogi (ed.) 2013b.

———, 2013b, (ed.) Abhinavā: Perspectives on Abhinavagupta. Essays in
Memory of K.C. Pandey, ed. Navjivan Rastogi, Delhi: Munshiram
Manoharlal.

Singh, Jaideva, 1988, Parātrīśikāvivaraṇa: The Secret of Tantric
Mysticism, English translation with notes and running exposition by
Jaidev Singh, Sanskrit text corrected, notes on technical points and
charts dictated by Swami Lakshmanjee, Delhi.

Torella, R., 1988, “A Fragment of Utpaladeva’s
Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti”, East and West, 38 (nos. 1-4): 137-74.

———, 1992, “The Pratyabhijñā and the Logical-Epistemological School of
Buddhism”, in T. Goudriaan (ed.), Ritual and Speculation in Early
Tantrism: Studies in Honor of André’ Padoux, New York, pp. 327-45.

———, 1994, ĪPVr̥ (See Utpaladeva)

———, 2004, “How Is Verbal Signification Possible: Understanding
Abhinavagupta’s reply”, Journal of Indian Philosophy, 32: 173-88.

———, 2007a, “Studies on Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti. Part I:
apoha and anupalabdhi in a Śaiva garb”, in K. Preisendanz (ed.)
Expanding and Merging Horizons: Contributions to South Asian and
Cross-Cultural Studies in Commemoration of Wilhelm Halbfass, Vienna, pp.
473-90.

———, 2007b, “Studies on Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti. Part II:
What Is Memory?”, in Indica et Tibetica. Festschrift für Michael Hahn
zum 65. Geburtstag von Freunden und Schülern überreicht, herausgegeben
von K. Klaus und J-U. Hartmann, Wien, pp. 539-63.

———, 2007c, “Studies on Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti. Part
III: Can a Cognition Become the Object of another Cognition?”, in D.
Goodall, A. Padoux (eds.) Mélanges tantriques … la mémoire ď Hélène
Brunner, Pondicherry, pp. 475-84.

———, 2007d, “Studies on Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti. Part IV:
Light of the Subject, Light of the Object”, in B. Kellner et al. (eds.)
Pramāṇakīrtiḥ: Papers Dedicated to Ernst Steinkellner on the Occasion of
his 70th Birthday, Wiener Studien zur Tibetologic und Buddhismuskunde,
Heft 70.1-2, Wien, pp. 925-39.

———, 2008, “From an Adversary to the Main Ally: The Place of Bhartr̥hari
in the Kashmirian Śaiva Advaita”, in M. Kaul and A. Aklujkar (eds.)
Linguistic Traditions of Kashmir: Essays in Memory of Paṇḍit Dinanath
Yaksha, Delhi, pp. 508-24.

———, 2012a, “Observation on Yogipratyakṣa”, in Saṁskr̥ta-Sādhutā —
Goodness of Sanskrit: Studies in Honour of Professor Ashok N. Aklujkar,
ed. Chickafumi Watanabe, Michele Desmarais, and Yoshicika Honda, Delhi,
pp. 470-87.

———, 2012b, “Studies in Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti. Part V:
Self-awareness and Yogic Perception”, in Voegeli, F. et al. (eds.)
Devadattīyam: Johannes Bronkhorst Felicitation Volume, Worlds of South
and Inner Asia 5, Peter Lang, Berne 2012, pp. 275-300.

———, forthcoming, “Inherited Cognition: Prasiddhi, āgama, Pratibhā,
śabdana (Bhartr̥hari, Utpaladeva, Abhinavagupta, Kumārila and Dharmakīrti
in Dialogue)”, in V. Eltschinger and H. Krasser (eds.) Proceedings of
the Panel on Āgama and Apologetics, XIV World Sanskrit Conference, Kyoto
2009, Vienna (copy courtesy author).

Vyas, S.P., 1989, Siddhitrayī of Rājānaka Utpaladeva, ed. and tr. into
Hindi, Kashi Sanskrit Series, Varanasi.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 1 “Utpalācārya’s method and point of view was followed by the next
generation not only in the sphere of philosophy as did Lakṣmaṇagupta,
Abhinava’s teacher in philosophy, but also in the sphere of poetics, [.
. .] as did Bhaṭṭa Indurāja and Bhaṭṭa Tauta, Abhinava’s teachers in
Dhvani and Nāṭyaśāstra, respectively.” (Pandey 1935: 78.)

2 Pandey 1935: 398; 1950: 92-94, 98, 140, 278; 1959: 40, 84, 98, 103-11,
152-53, 327-28, 539-40; 1963: 710, 924, 927.

3 Kane 1951 (3rd edn.; prior editions 1910, 1923): 132 (Notes X.37).

4 “Abhinavagupta’s Notion of Camatkāra in Aesthetical Experience”
written for the National Seminar on Gopinath Kaviraj, Calcutta.

5 Gnoli 1968: XLV-XLVI.

6 Raghavan 1981 (being the collection of his papers written between
1932-70): 121-23.

7 Lath 1978: 101, 195 (n 2).

8 bhaṭṭendurājasya sākṣāt svaguror guravo ’mī iti paramagurutvaṁ
pratyabhijñāprasthānapravartayitr̥̥̄ṇām utpaladevapādānām । — Kaumudī on
DhĀL: 175. K.R. Pisharoti (Journal of G.N. Jha Institute, 1: 445-52)
shows that Uttuṅgodaya was alive in ad 1480 (vide Kane [1951: 199]).

9 pratyabhijñeyaśabdenedam āha [. . .] yathoktam asmatparamagurubhiḥ
śrīmadutpalapādaiḥ । — Kaumudī on DhĀL: 175.

10 utpaladevapāda(dā)s tv asmatparamaguravo vyācakṣate [. . .] vayaṁ tu
manmahe । vīṇāyām api [. . .] । — ABh on NŚ 31.26, IV, p. 164.

11 Reproduced below is the relevant observation from Raghavan in full
(1981: 123):

“The Abhinavabhāratī is the only source of information as regards
Utpaladeva having written a work on music. Śārṅgadeva’s list and the
lists in other music works, cataloguing the saṅgītācāryas, do not
mention him. There seems to be however one reference, perhaps to this
work of Utpaladeva on music in the Śivatattva-Ratnākara of Basavarāja,
in his Saṅgīta Chapter. This work is a thesaurus like Someśvara’s
Abhilaṣitārtha-Cintāmaṇi otherwise called Mānasollāsa, to which the
Śivatattva-Ratnākara is much indebted. Chapter six of this work of
Basava treats of the fine arts. The concluding verses of this chapter
give the authorities of the Śāstras. The following refer to the Saṅgīta
Section —

dattilena kr̥taṁ nandibhr̥ṅgikohalakādibhiḥ ।

bharataṁ cādibharataṁ ca gītaratnākaraṁ tathā ।।

utpalādyaṁ parimalaṁ kr̥tiṁ śārṅgadharasya ca ।

Most likely the text of the last line is somewhat corrupt. Anyhow we
have a mention here, among authorities on Saṅgīta, of a name, Utpala.”
(In “Index” on p. 200, this work is shown as Utpalaparimala, but since
the Index [Authors, Works, Journals] was prepared posthumously, not much
value needs be attached to it.)

12 Torella 1994: Introduction, 2008: 508-24; Rastogi 2009: 324.

13 sā sarvavidyāśilpānāṁ kalānāṁ copanibandhinī ।

tadvaśād abhiniṣpannaṁ sarvaṁ vastu vibhajyate ।। — VP 1.117 (125)

[“It is this which is the basis of all the sciences, crafts and arts.
Whatever is created due to this can be analysed and communicated.” — tr.
Iyer, p. 112]. For Vr̥ṣabha’s analysis of Bhartr̥hari’s inherent art
process, see Rastogi 2009: 314-15 (specially n 69).

14 VBh 73: gītādiviṣayāsvādasamasaukhyaikatātmanaḥ । yoginas
tanmayatvena manorūḍhes tadātmatā ।।

15 ŚS 3.9-11.

16 SpK 2.5.

17 NŚ 1.11: krīḍanīyakam icchāmo . . .

18 SC 59 and 9 respectively. For a contextual construction see Rastogi
2012: 386-87.

19 rūpaprasārarasato garhitatvam ayuktimat । — ŚD 1.12ab

20 In confining myself to the secular, I am guided by Abhinavagupta, who
fervently believes that the realm of aesthetics, though trans-mundane,
is not religious nor yogic. In the yogic there is absolute joy, bliss,
but no beauty experience, since beauty experience, in art or even in
nature, involves some intervening role of medium (see ABh, 1: 285). The
outcome of such an approach is visible in considering rasa-experience as
a kith and kin of the Absolutic experience (parabrahmāsvādasavidha) but
not the absolutic, religious or spiritual experience proper. For
detailed treatment see my “Abhinavagupta kī Saundarya-dr̥ṣṭi” in Rastogi
2012: 365-66.

21 Bhattacharya 1958: Editor’s Introduction.

22 yato ’tisundaro ’si । — ŚSĀ 18.21

23 tvam eva lalitaḥ pūjānāṁ kila bhājanam । — ŚSĀ 17.42

24 It is only in the late post-Utpala era that the Vaiṣṇava Vedānta
systems revert to such designations.

25 ŚSĀ 1.5, 22; 2.26; 5.16, 22; 9.1; 16.4-5; 17.42, etc.

26 ŚSĀ 5.23.

27 jñānī hi bhaktaḥ । — Vivr̥ti cited in ĪPVV 1, 29. Abhinavagupta
glosses: jñānitvam eva nāma bhaktir iti yāvat.

28 Glossing bhaktyā from Vivr̥ti (cit. in ĪPVV 1, 24) Abhinavagupta says:
satye pūrṇānandasvarūpe satatasamāveśaprābalyaṁ vidyālakṣaṇaṁ bhaktiḥ
tayā । — ĪPVV 1, 24.

29 jayabhaktimadālolalīlotpalamahotsava । — ŚSĀ 14.23. Mark the pun in
the word utpala “lotus” and “person named Utpala”.

30 bhaktimadena samāveśodrekeṇa ālolā spr̥haṇīyā vyāptā ca līlā
parispando yasya tathābhūtasya utpalasya etannāmnaḥ asmatparameṣṭhino
mahotsavaḥ । — Vr̥tti on the above, p. 229.

31 Kaviraj 1933 (repr. 1963): 11. Also see Rastogi 1987: 40-44; 2012:
181, 344-47.

32 NŚ I (2nd edn.): 332-35.

33 kas tarhy atra sthāyī । ucyate, iha tattvajñānam eva tāvan
mokṣa-sādhanam iti tasyaiva mokṣe sthāyitā yuktā । — ABh on NŚ I: 336.

34 Ibid.: 336-37.

35 ata eva īśvarapraṇidhānaviṣaye bhaktiśraddhe [. . .] aṅgam iti na
tayoḥ pr̥thag rasatvena gaṇanam । — ABh on NŚ I: 340.

36 Abhinavagupta brings out the implication of “yayā” in the Vivr̥ti as:
tadbhāvaṁ tadāsvādalābhena tadāveśavaivaśyaṁ gataṁ mānasam eṣām iti
bhakteḥ svarūpam uktam । alabdhatadāsvādasyāpi tatra prāptigrahaḥ
śraddheti । — ĪPVV I: 27.

37 “alaṁkāra śāstra meṁ mukhya bhakti śānta rasa ke antargata hai aura
gauṇa bhakti bhāvamātra hai । bhaktiśāstra meṁ śānta rasa svayaṁ hī
bhakti viśeṣa hai aura mukhya bhakti to rasasvarūpā hai ।” — Kaviraj
1933 (1963): 11.

38 Kaviraj does not name Utpala, but the whole argumentation revolves
round Utpala’s presentation.

39 Kaviraj 1933: 10.

40 kadā navarasārdrārdrasambhogāsvādanotsukam । — ŚSĀ 9.1. Kṣemarāja
glosses navarasārdrārdrasambhoga°: navarasena ārdrārdraḥ
nūtanabhaktiprasareṇa sātiśayaṁ spr̥haṇīyo samāveśātmā sambhogaḥ । —
ŚSĀ-Vr̥tti: 115; also see Rastogi 2012: 346.

41 itthamatyarthabhinnāvabhāsārthakhacite vibhau । samalo vimalo vā ’pi
vyavahāro ’nubhūyate ।। — ĪPK 1.7.14. My translation is influenced by
Pandey and Torella both. The word khacite is semantically very rich. In
Abhinavagupta’s exegesis it is uparakte (coloured). Both interpretations
— khacite and uparakte — carry pictorial and sculptural shades in their
meaning. Cf. ĪPV I: 390; ĪPVV II: 404: khacite svarūpānanyathābhāvena
uparakte. Torella also refers to it (1994: 146, n 28), but does not
discuss it.

42 māyāśaktyā bhedaviṣayo ’yaṁ sarvo vyavahāras tathājñānināṁ śuddho
’jñānāndhānāṁ tu malinas tattadabhinnārthāvabhāsabhāji bhagavati
saṁbhāvyate ’nubhavena । — Vr̥tti on ĪPK 1.4.14

43 na kevalam ete kāryakāraṇabhāvasmaraṇabādhāvyavahārāḥ
sakalalokayātrāsāmānyavyavahārabhūtā ekapramātr̥niṣṭhāḥ, yāvat
avāntaravyavahārā api ye krayavikrayādayaḥ samalāḥ,
upadeśyopadeśabhāvādayaś ca nirmalāḥ, te ’pi ekapramātr̥niṣṭhā eva
bhavanti । — ĪPV I: 389.

44 One could venture to describe it as nirmalo ’vāntaro vyavahāraḥ in
the light of Abhinavagupta’s treatment.

45 samalo māyāndhānāṁ krayavikrayavivādādiḥ nirmalaḥ
pratyabhijñātātmaparamārthānāṁ [. . .] viśeṣadr̥śi [. . .] śuddhātmanām
upadeśadīkṣānityanaimittikādyanuṣṭhāna- dhyānasamādhānādivyavahāraḥ [. .
.] vyavahārarūpatā sā hi bhedābhedaprāṇitasamanvayātmā sarvathā
bhedatirodhau tirodhīyate eva, tathāpi pratyabhijñātayāvatparamātmanāṁ
sa vyavahāraḥ svaparātmani malaśodhanabodhanaikadha(read gha)natvāt
vimala eva yuktaḥ । — ĪPVV II: 405

46 The basis for my conjecture is provided by the following phrases in
the ĪPVV: siddhāḥ, [. . .] niṣkalāḥ, [. . .] tadartham eva siddhaśabda
eṣāṁ viśeṣaṇam, tadā ca ādiśabdenaiva niṣkalātmano grahaṇam । — ibid.

47 “tathājñāninām” iti vr̥ttau samastaṁ padam । “saṁbhāvyate” iti vr̥ttāv
uktaṁ mūḍhānāṁ jhaṭiti tathābhimānābhāve ’pi uktopadeśapariśīlanadiśā
prakāśate eva ayam arthaḥ iti darśayitum । — ibid.

Utpala entertains the similar viewpoint in his ŚSĀ 12.24: vyavahārapade
’pi sarvathā pratibhātv arthakalāpa eṣa mām । bhavato ’vayavo yathā na
tu svata evādaraṇīyatāṁ gataḥ ।। [“Even in the realm of worldly
transaction let this mass of objects shine to me as thy limb in all
respects and not that it evokes regard for its own sake.”] [Also see n
281 below.]

48 tad uktaṁ śivavijñānopaniṣadi — “grāhyagrāhakasaṁvittiḥ sāmānyā
sarvadehinām । yogināṁ tu viśeṣo ’yaṁ saṁbandhe sāvadhānatā ।।” — VBh
106; iti । “kevalam” iti saty api sārvatrike māyāvyāpāre idamadhikam ity
arthaḥ । — ĪPVV I: 405.

49 anubhūyate ca sopadeśaiḥ avadhānaparaiḥ yena eṣāṁ yaiva saṁsāradaśā
saṁmatā vyavahāradaśā saiva pramātr̥tattvaprakhyātmikā śivabhūmiḥ ।
yaduktam ’saṁbandhe sāvadhānatā’ iti । — ĪPV I : 391

50 adhikāriṇo ’dhikā ’sti pratipattiḥ । — ABh I: 278. This idea of
adhika reminds me of Tagore’s notion of the “Surplus” that seeks its
outlet in the creation of art. Vide, Das 1996: 352. Except drawing
attention to the semiotic resemblance between the two ideas across the
vast historical spectrum there is neither my intention nor effort to
compare the two.

51 apravartitapūrvo ’tra kevalaṁ mūḍhatāvaśāt ।
śaktiprakāśen-eśādivyavahāraḥ pravartyate ।। [(“What in reality happens)
is only that the use in practical reality of notions and expressions
(°vyavahāraḥ) like ‘Lord’, which due to the condition of obfuscation was
not brought about earlier (apravartitapūrvaḥ) is promoted through
bringing to light of the powers”. — tr. Torella.] It may be noted that
īśādivyavahāra, in effect, amounts to nirmalatāvyavahāra.

52 kintu mohavaśād asmin dr̥ṣṭe ’py anupalakṣite । śaktyāviṣkaraṇeneyaṁ
pratyabhijñopadarśyate ।। [“However, since He, though being directly
perceived (dr̥ṣṭe ’pi) is not discerned for what He is because of
delusion, precisely for this reason, by bringing his Powers to light,
the recognition (pratyabhijñā) of Him is shown.” — tr. ibid.]

53 ĪPK 3.2.4.

54 yaḥ prasādalava īśvarasthito yā ca bhaktir iva mām upeyuṣī । tau
parasparasamanvitau kadā tādr̥śe vapuṣi rūḍhim eṣyataḥ ।। — ŚSĀ 8.1
[“When will that small amount of grace/ Abiding with the Lord / And that
small amount of devotion / That has come to me / Unite to become like
that unique form — / The blissful body of Śiva?” — tr. Bailly].

55 sarvathā nairmalyātmā prasādo bhagavadrūpatā । — ĪPVV I: 25-26

56 prasādo nirmalībhāvas tena saṁpūrṇarūpatā ।। ātmanā tena hi śivaḥ
svayaṁ pūrṇaḥ prakāśate । — TĀ 13.286-87

57 svecchāvabhāsitāśeṣalokayātrātmane namaḥ । śivāya śaśvad-
acchannasvacchasvacchandavr̥ttaye ।। — Benedictory verse of the Vivr̥ti,
cited in ĪPVV I: 3. Lokayātrā here stands for vyavahāra: yātrāḥ
prāptayaḥ parasparasaṁbandhāḥ । — ibid.

58 tena “śaśvad” iti kālaparicchedāsaṁbhavaḥ । “acchanna” iti
svarūpānatirekaḥ । “svaccha” iti anatiriktatve ’pi
atirikta-tābhāsasaṁbhavaḥ । “svacchanda” iti vimarśasvātantryayogaḥ ।
“vr̥tti”-padena eṣāṁ rūpāṇāṁ bhagavati śaktimati tādātmyāvabhāsa uktaḥ ।
[. . .] vr̥ttir vartanaṁ svarūpaspanditam eva yasya, sa eva [. . .] śivaḥ
parameśvaraḥ tasmai namaḥ iti [. . .] । — ĪPVV I: 7.

59 prabhur īśādisaṁkalpair nirmāya vyavahārayet ।।

Vr̥tti: svātantryāt [. . .] īśvaraḥ śivo veditā ity evamādivikalpair
ābhāsayati bhāvanādivyavahārārtham.

60 evam ekā kriyā saiṣā sakramāntarbahiḥsthitiḥ ।
ekasyai-vobhayākārasahiṣṇor upapāditā ।। — ĪPK 2.4.5. ĪPV adds (II:
160): sa caikaḥ āśrayaḥ saṁvidrūpatvena svacchatvasvatantratvābhyām
ubhayam apy antarbahīrūpaṁ sahate iti.

61 mohān manyamānasya moho ’pasāryate । — ĪPV II: 144. See for related
discussion, Rastogi 2012: 338-39.

62 tad āha “atiśayanirantara” iti । nairantaryam avadhānasya
vijātīyacittavyavahārābhāvo nairmalyam । — Vivr̥ti on ĪPVr̥ 1.4.2 (Torella
2007b: 548, text). It may not be difficult to revisit our initial
allusion to the notion of attentiveness in relationship in this regard.

63 śuṣkendhanāgnivat svacchajalavat sahasaiva yaḥ । vyāpnoty anyat
prasādo ’sau sarvatra vihitasthitiḥ ।। — KP VIII, cited in Kane 1951:
309.

64 kintu mohavaśād asmin dr̥ṣṭe ’py anupalakṣite । śaktyāviṣkaraṇeneyaṁ
pratyabhijñopadarśyate ।। [“However, since He, though being directly
perceived (dr̥ṣṭe’pi) is not marked (precisely noticed) because of
delusion by bringing (His) powers to light, this recognition (of Him) is
shown.” — tr. Torella, with modification]. This kārikā is sometimes
numbered as 1.1.2 taking ādiśloka (opening verse) separately from the
upodghāta (preface, foreword, introduction).

65 vītavighnatā, prakāśa and mohāpasāraṇa.

66 pratyabhijñāna, vimarśa, camatkāra and hr̥dayaṅgamatā.

67 dr̥ḍhaniścayarūpaṁ pratyabhijñānamātram । — ĪPVr̥ 1.2.3. Here “firm
ascertainment” (dr̥ḍhaniścaya) is not just an epistemic event, but
something more fulfilling — going direct to the heart. We discuss it
later.

68 ĪPK 4.1.17: aparijñātaḥ; 4.1.12: parijānataḥ and 4.1.3:
svasvarūpāparijñānamayo ’nekaḥ pumān mataḥ. Here Utpala construes
aparijñāna as finitization (parimitatvakaraṇa of the infinite,
pervasive) and reduces it to apratyabhijñāna: etad eva viśvātmanaḥ
parimitatvakaraṇam apratyabhijñānam ucyate । — Vr̥tti on 4.1.3. Thus in
Utpala’s view aparijñāna is the fragmented knowledge of the Universal
Self and pratyabhijñāna, by reverse implication, amounts to the
knowledge of the unfragmented, infinite or limitless reality. In fact,
defragmentation here qualifies knowledge or knowledge act.

69 ĪPK 3.1.7: tasyaiśvaryasvabhāvasya paśubhāve prakāśikā । vidyāśaktiḥ
[. . .] ।। Prakāśikā, vidyāśaktiḥ is glossed with svātmanaḥ
pratyabhijñānaṁ vidyayā in the Vr̥tti. It may be read in conjunction with
vidyābhijñāpitaiśvaryaḥ (ĪPK 3.2.2) glossed by the Vr̥tti as
ātmatattvābhijñayā. Abhinavagupta also connects abhijñā with
pratyabhijñā in ĪPV on 3.2.2 (II: 247): pratyabhijñāpadaṁ prāpitam
aiśvaryaṁ yasya saḥ.

70 This is the meaning assigned by Abhinavagupta. Though Utpala
frequently uses the word anusandhāna in the sense of unification,
co-ordination, mutual expectancy but expressly not in this sense.
However, Abhinavagupta assigns this meaning in an exclusive literary
context, explaining the word pratyabhijñeyam used by Ānandavardhana (DhĀ
1.8), on the explicit testimony of his master Utpala’s ĪPK 4.1.17.
According to him it is not a mere mechanical knowledge of the already
known but a kind of reconstructing, reinventing or reinterpreting,
capable of numberless possibilities providing the metaphysical basis for
the theory of dhvani “suggested meaning”. The format acquired by this
pratyabhijñāna is “this is such or of this kind” and not the usual kind
“this is the same thing”: pratyabhijñeyaśabdena idam āha [. . .] idam
ittham iti viśeṣato nirūpyamāṇaṁ sahasraśākhībhavati । yad uktam
asmatparamagurubhiḥ śrīmadutpalapādaiḥ “tais tair apy upayācitaiḥ [. .
.] tatpratyabhijñoditā ।।” (ĪPK 4/1/17) iti । tena jñātasyāpi viśeṣato
nirūpaṇam anusandhānātmakam atra pratyabhijñānam । na tu tad evedam idam
ity etāvanmātram । (DhĀL, pp. 35-36). Such a construction, if I may say
so, reminds us of the attributive recognition (dharma-pratyabhijñāna)
being the second variety in Śivopādhyāya’s twofold classification into
the substantive and the attributive recognitions. What must not be
missed is that Śivopādhyāya traces this division to ĪPK 4.1.12 (sarvo
mamāyaṁ vibhavaḥ, etc.) and its confirmation to ĪPV (II: 303), cf.
VBh-Vr̥tti, p. 96. By naming them as dharmi- and dharma-pratyabhijñāna
the attention of the scholars was drawn to this by me about three
decades back (Rastogi 1977-78: 856).

According to Abhinavagupta, Ānandavardhana prescribes this careful
inspection and constant investigation of word and meaning as mandatory
aspect of a great poet’s education. This is no doubt Ānanda’s primary
intention, as also confirmed by Abhinavagupta. But Jagannath Pathak
(2003: 96, n 2) shows that Ānanda’s language could be understood to
secondarily imply that it should be part of the qualified reader’s or
critic’s education as well.

This is becoming a very lengthy note, but for the benefit of the readers
I am reproducing below Ingalls’s translation of the DhĀ and Locana (pp.
124-25), of the relevant portion:

“K 1.8. [DhĀ (kārikā)]: This meaning and whatever particular word has
the capability of conveying it are the meaning and the word which should
be carefully scrutinized (or recognized, pratyabhijñeyau) by a great
poet.

A [Ānandavardhana (prose)]: The suggested meaning and the particular
word that has the capability of conveying it, not just any word: this
word and meaning should be scrutinized (or recognized) by a great poet.
It is by the proper use of the suggested sense and the word that
suggests it that a great poet deserves his name, not by mere structuring
of the denoting word and the denoted meaning.

L [Locana] should be scrutinized (or recognized): [. . .] And by the
suffix’s use in this mandatory sense he indicates that this [seeking out
of the suggestive word and sense] forms of [a poet’s] education. By
using the word pratyabhijñeyau he would indicate that although poetry
may flash forth (parisphurati) of its own accord in the way described
[by Bhāmaha 1.5] “poetry comes to the man of genius, and at that only
sometimes”; still, it increases in a thousand ways if that man will keep
considering his poem carefully, thinking, “this should be like this”
[i.e.: “I should say such and such, and not such and such”, in this way
always seeking the suggestive word and sense] (Brackets mine as this
constitutes editors’ explanation and not Abhinavagupta’s text). The
matter was put forth as follows by my teacher’s teacher, the renowned
Utpala: “As some lover brought by many prayers to a lady’s side, only to
find that she does not recognize him when he is come and so all hope of
making love to her [? read ‘him’] is gone; just so is God, although he
be our very soul, misprised within us and cannot share with us his
glory. Therefore I have written this book called Recognition.”

One sees from this that pratyabhijñā (recognition, scrutiny) is a
careful inspection of and continuous reflection upon an object although
that object is already [in some sense] known. This is what is meant by
pratyabhijñā and not the mere recognition that consists in noting that
“this is the same thing I saw before”.

Two more points merit attention here. One, no special effort is needed
to see that this kind of formulation of recognition seems to be implicit
in or inspired by the very theorization of recognition in “noticing” the
already “perceived” which hitherto remained “unnoticed” in the
immediately preceding section. Two, it also reconnects us with the
“doctrine of viśeṣa” alluded to during the course of configuring
aesthetic activities as forming human transaction of the pure category.
I have tried to show it elsewhere (Rastogi 2012: 151) that the idea of
pratyabhjñā, though not found directly in Kallaṭa, Vasugupta or
Vijñāna-Bhairava, was acquiring shape in particular direction. The idea
of a thing perceived indistinctly at first becoming distinct later on
keen re-observation due to exertion of one’s inner strength in SpK 3.4
(yathā hy artho ’sphuṭo dr̥ṣṭaḥ sāvadhāne ’pi cetasi । bhūyaḥ sphuṭataro
bhāti svabalodyogabhāvitaḥ ।।) and the acute mindfulness distinguishing
the yogic perception as regards subject–object relationship in VBh 106
(grāhyagrāhakasaṁvittiḥ sāmānyā sarvadehinām । yogināṁ tu viśeṣo ’sti
saṁbandhe sāvadhānatā ।।) seem to have had direct bearing on the
evolution of the notion of Pratyabhijñā into this particular mode.
Otherwise there was apparently no reason for Ānandavardhana, who was a
fellow courtier of Kallaṭa in the court of Avantivarman to have resorted
to this specific conceptualization of dhvani (i.e. yatnataḥ
pratyabhijñeyau tau śabdārthau mahākaveḥ ।। — DhĀ 1.8) and for
Abhinavagupta to have opted for this particular formulation of
Pratyabhijñā directly invoking the authority of Utpala from outside the
skirts of poetics in a solitary allusion to him throughout the Locana.
It seems that Abhinavagupta views this kind of abstraction as
constituting general parameter of real knowing. In the opening remarks
of the 16th chapter of the Gītārtha-Saṁgraha he describes such a
knowledge as vicāra, vimarśa or parāmarśa that is constituted by rise of
knowing marked by reasoning and reflection post-instruction: bodhaś ca
nāma śrutimayajñānānantaram ’idam ittham’
ityevaṁbhūtayukticintābhāvanāmayajñānodayena
vicāravimarśaparāmarśādirūpeṇa [. . .] bhavati । (BhGAS, p. 157) and
connects it with the reflection in totality coming later in the Gītā
(XVIII: 63: vimr̥śyamevamaśeṣeṇa) — ibid. Therefore in all fairness,
credit must be given to Abhinavagupta for demonstrating that from tad
evedam (“it is indeed that”) to idam itthaṁ (“it is like this”) to idam
etādr̥k (“it is such and such” — ĪPK 2.3.1). Utpala is intent upon
providing a unified level field from metaphysics to epistemology to
aesthetics transforming whole cognition into recognition and perception
of poetic meaning into the recognitive apperception of poetic meaning
through the discovery of poetic word. (See Rastogi 2012: 170 and also
Rastogi [2013a]: chapter on pramāṇa.)

71 The manner in which Utpala demonstrates the notion of Pratyabhijñā
highlighting its aesthetic nuance reminds us of the analogous
linguo-semantic treatment meted out to the word recognition in English.
Recognition comes from Latin verb cognoscere, to know, understand; thus
recognize is to know again, and incognito, unknown. Similarly the same
Latin verb cognoscere gives us connoisseur, gourmet, cognoscente,
aesthete (sahr̥daya). (Vide Reader’s Digest Family Word Finder, 1975, p.
174.)

72 kevalam asya svasaṁvedanasiddhasyāpi (glossing dr̥ṣṭe’pi) īśvarasya
māyāvyāmohād ahr̥dayaṅgamatvād [. . .]। Abhinavagupta remarks that this
causal ablative glosses the locative anupalakṣite which is therefore a
nimittasaptamī: nimittasaptamyarthas tu ahr̥dayaṅgamatvāt iti
hetupañcamyā vyākhyātaḥ । — ĪPVV I: 80 (see also Torella 1994: 3, text
note 22)

73 It may be noted in passing that Abhinavagupta in the ĪPV faithfully
echoes the Vr̥tti in treating anupalakṣite as hr̥dayaṅgamībhāvam aprāpte.
Abhinavagupta also sees a close connection between ĪPK 1.1.3 and 4.1.17
(the kārikā that Abhinavagupta cites to interpret Ānandavardhana’s
dhvani and uses here as an illustration) in holding that this appeal to
heart (or heart’s conviction) leads to the effective realization of the
internal causal efficiency which consists in pleasure or joy essentially
in the nature of relish equated with repose in the subject. The
actualization of this kind of causal efficiency depends upon emergence
of absolute conviction in one’s being ontologically full and complete.
Recognition remains the sole tool for effecting such a conviction:
anupalakṣite sarvathā hr̥dayaṅgamībhāvam aprāpte ata eva
pūrṇatāvabhāsanasādhyām arthakriyām akurvati,
tatpūrṇatāvabhāsanātmakābhimānaviśeṣasiddhaye pratyabhijñā [. . .] — ĪPV
I: 58; dvividhārthakriyāsti, bāhyā cāṅkurādikā,
pramātr̥viśrānticamatkārasārā ca prītyādirūpā [. . .]
pramātr̥viśrāntisārārthakriyā pratyabhijñānena vinā na dr̥ṣṭā [. . .]। —
ibid., II: 312-13. Also see ĪPV I: 220; ĪPVV II: 216.

I want to show that Abhinavagupta’s entire art speculation develops
around the central notion of heart. The total, dynamic and interactive
involvement of heart at every stage of art creation, experience and
appreciation, the starting point of his theory of art, is what
Abhinavagupta takes straight from Utpala. We must acknowledge that the
idea of arthakriyā envisaged right above is Abhinavagupta’s own
reduction and apparently would run counter to Utpala’s known stand that
internality being conceived in terms of identity with the subject would
have no space for causal efficiency which could logically be justified
in the realm of differentiated external reality only (āntaratvāt
pramātraikye naiṣāṁ bhedanibandhanā । arthakriyāpi bāhyatve sā
bhinnābhāsabhedataḥ ।। — ĪPK 1.8.6). In Abhinavan synthesis, however,
all cultural pursuits — viz. philosophical, spiritual, religious,
aesthetic and the like — comprise nirmala vyavahāra. And in virtue of
their constituting vyavahāra per se they, of necessity, must have some
arthakriyā, some immediate purpose to achieve. In so doing they graduate
from the domain of differentiated reality to the domain of
differentiated–undifferentiated reality tilted more towards the
undifferentiated, enlivened as they are by the underlining unity
furnished by this arthakriyā — it is arthakriyā because it is actuated
by conviction in or perception of one’s holistic and absolute identity,
which could now be theorized as internal — by reason of its being of the
nature of repose in the experiencing subject, standing for pleasurable
and joyous experiences. It is to be noted, by employing ādi (in
prītyādirūpā) Abhinavagupta renders pleasurable experience into a much
broader and more inclusive category so as to cover all experiences in
evenly situated varied contexts.

74 On the issue at hand Utpala’s inputs may be culled from three sources
(ĪPK, ĪPVr̥, ĪPViv) duly coordinated by the ĪPVV:

(A) ĪPK 1.1.3

ĪPK: dr̥ṣṭe ’py anupalakṣite [. . .] upadarśyate ।

Vr̥tti: svasaṁvedanasiddhasyāpi [. . .] ahr̥dayaṅgamatvād [. . .]
upadarśyate ।

(a) (upadarśyate from kārikā is repeated in the Vr̥tti without
explanation.)

(b) According to ĪPVV I: 80, dr̥ṣṭe ’pi anupalakṣite is construed as
dr̥ṣṭasya anupalakṣitatvāt and glossed with svasaṁvedanasiddhasyāpi
ahr̥dayaṅgamatvāt ।

Vivr̥ti: (tat katham uktam) “asminn īśvare dr̥ṣṭe ’pi” iti । (āha)
“dr̥ṣṭaśabdo ’yam” iti । [. . .] (tata eva ṭīkāyāṁ) (I: 79-81, 85-87)
“dr̥ṣṭasyāpi” ityādi “ahīyata” ityantaṁ (mukhyatayā dr̥ṣṭāntaviṣayam । [.
. .] “svasaṁvedanasiddhasya” ity (api vr̥ttau gauṇaṁ draṣṭavyaṁ) [. . .]
(nimittasaptamyarthas tu) “ahr̥dayaṅgamatvāt” iti (hetupañcamyā
vyākhyātaḥ) । [. . .] (nanu dr̥ṣṭaṁ ca anupalakṣitaṁ ceti katham
ityāśaṅkyāha) “dr̥ṣṭasyāpi” iti । [. . .] (hr̥dayaviśrāntir
hr̥dayaṅgamatvaṁ ca nāma kim ity āha) “prakāśam upārūḍhānāṁ”
(pramātr̥prakāśabalena prakāśamānānām, na tu svayam । etad artham eva
uktaṁ) “pramātrāveśāt” iti । [. . .] (kathaṁ ca parāmarśo hr̥dayam ity
āha) “parāmarśalakṣaṇo hi” iti । [. . .] (evaṁ mukhyatayā dr̥ṣṭāntapakṣe
sūtravr̥ttyarthayojanaṁ ṭīkākr̥tā kr̥tam) [. . .] (etad eva dārṣṭāntike
yojayati) “evam asya” iti । [. . .] “pūrṇa” iti [. . .] (tasya
upalakṣaṇaṁ) [. . .] । (kiṁ tadupalakṣaṇam ucyate ityāha) “tat” iti । [.
. .] (nanu kathaṁ tad evaṁbhūtam anāsvāditapūrvam aiśvaryam
āsvādagocarībhavati ity āśaṅkyāha) “hr̥daya” iti । “bhavet” iti
(saṁbhāvyam eva asya bhavanam iti) । [. . .] (upa samīpe iti
hr̥dayasaṁgamanena pradhānatayā darśyate) [. . .] (tena vr̥ttau
sūtrānusāreṇaiva) “upadarśyate” iti (uktam) ।

(B) ĪPK 1.5.14

ĪPK: saiṣā (sāratayā) hr̥dayaṁ (parameṣṭhinaḥ ।)

Vr̥tti: saiva (pratyavamarśātmā citikriyāśaktiḥ । sā) svātmapratiṣṭhārūpā
hr̥dayam [. . .] nigadyate ।

(a) (Vr̥tti brings forward citiḥ pratyavamarśātmā from ĪPK 1.5.13
construing citiḥ as citikriyāśaktiḥ).

Vivr̥ti: “sāratayā” iti (sūtre yad anuvadanaṁ hetutayā hr̥dayatve

(II: 203-06) sādhye, tat vyācaṣṭe) “yathā” iti “cetanaṁ pratiṣṭhā” iti
(saṁbandhaḥ) “cetanāvatām api” iti “yathā” iti (saṁbandhaḥ) । [. . .]
(prakr̥te yojayati) “tathaiva” iti । [. . .] (sā parā vimarśaśaktiḥ
parameśvarasya) “pratiṣṭhā” iti (anena śabdena, parameśvarasya)
“hr̥dayam” iti (anena ca śabdena vācyā) । [. . .] “hr̥dayam eva” iti (na
atra upacaritam hr̥dayatvam, apitu mukhyameveti bhāvaḥ ।

(a) Abhinavagupta (ĪPVV I: 81) connects “hr̥dayaṁ” in the Vr̥tti and
“parāmarśalakṣaṇo hi” in the Vivr̥ti with ĪPK 1.5.13 and 1.5.14 reading
them together following the Vr̥tti on 1.5.14.

75 nanu dr̥ṣṭaṁ anupalakṣitaṁ ceti katham ity āśaṅkyāha “dr̥ṣṭasyāpi” iti
। hr̥dayaṁ vimarśaḥ tatprāptiparyantaṁ darśanam upalakṣitam। tasmin sati
samucitavyavahāropayojanam, nānyathā mārgadr̥ṣṭe tr̥ṇādāv eva । tena
hr̥dayena saha sātmatā, ātmarūpatā, sākalyāt ātmarūpatādhyavasāyo vā । —
ĪPVV I: 81-82

76 etadartham evoktaṁ “pramātrāveśāt” iti [. . .] kathaṁ ca parāmarśo
hr̥dayam iti । āha “parāmarśalakṣaṇo hi” iti । [. . .]
samastāṁśasvīkāreṇa vimr̥śāmi iti vartamānaṁ dharmirūpasāram, ābhāsate
iti tu bhāgamātram । — ibid.: 82

77 etadupalakṣaṇaṁ hr̥dayasya āvarjanaṁ tadunmukhīkaraṇaṁ satyam
etadrūpam iti hr̥dayaṅgamatvaṁ ca ucyate । — ĪPVV I: 81-82

78 atas tadvyavahāramātram api neha sādhyate api tu upāṁśucchannaṁ
sthitaṁ tat, upa samīpe hr̥dayasaṁgamanena pradhānatayā darśyate । [. .
.] tena vr̥ttau sūtrānusāreṇaiva “upadarśyate” iti uktam । — ibid.: 87.
Abhinavagupta in order to lend further precision compares upadarśana
with “urging or prompting to be fully concentrated” (avadhāna-dāpana,
lit. causing one give attention to): avadhānadāpanārūpeṇa tulyam । —
ĪPVV I: 87

79 niviḍanijamohasaṁkaṭakāriṇā [. . .]
sattvodreka-prakāśānandamaya-nijasaṁvidviśrāntilakṣaṇena [. . .] bhogena
। — ABh I: 277

80 (ahr̥dayaṅgamatvād) asādhāraṇaprabhāvābhijñānakhyāpanena
(dr̥ḍhaniścayarūpapratyabhijñānamātraṁ) upadarśyate । — ĪPVr̥ on 1.1.3.
The word prabhāva is somewhat peculiar. Ordinarily it indicates impact,
influence. However, according to Abhinavagupta, it stands for
distinctive trait solely responsible for precise identification in the
first place and also for the exclusive function to be discharged by that
entity: prabhāvaḥ — prakarṣeṇa yadvaśāt bhāvyate, anyavilakṣaṇatayā ca
kartavyaṁ bhāvayati iti । — ĪPVV I: 86. Literally the word should denote
prabhutā (lordliness) or the highly abstracted, that is the essential,
state of being — prakr̥ṣṭa bhāva, i.e. svabhāva. In this case, powers of
the self or Lord — knowledge and action, jñāna and kriyā — transpire to
be his/His abstracted essence. The word asādhāraṇa provides exclusivity.
It appears that Utpala inherited this word (i.e. prabhāva) from his
teacher Somānanda: yathā nr̥paḥ sārvabhaumaḥ prabhāvāmodabhāvitaḥ । — ŚD
1.37cd. Utpala glosses prabhāva as aiśvarya in his Padasaṁgati:
aiśvaryacamatkāravāsitaḥ । — p. 29

81 My deduction is based on Abhinavagupta’s reformulation of “noticing”
(upalakṣaṇa) in terms of “bringing about camatkāra” (camatkārāpatti)
while explaining the word pūrṇa in the Vivrt̥i: (“pūrṇa” iti [. . .]
vimarśas tatsvabhāve yaś camatkāraḥ [. . .] tasya yā āpattiḥ [. . .] vā
yā camatkārāpattiḥ [. . .] tayā upalakṣitaḥ । — ĪPVV I: 85) and Utpala’s
other presentations. See p. 150 and n 142 also.

82 sā cāvighnā saṁvit camatkāraḥ । [. . .] — ABh I: 278.

83 bhuñjānasya adbhutabhogaspandāviṣṭasya ca manaḥkaraṇaṁ camatkāra iti
। — ibid.

84 camatkāras tajjo ’pi kampapulakollukasanādir vikāraḥ । — ibid.

85 Direct: (a) Vr̥tti on ŚD 1.7cd, 1.37cd; (b) ĪPVr̥ 1.5.11; 4.1.1, 6; (c)
ĪPViv 1.5.11, 14; 2.4.20; (d) ŚSĀ 1.22; 13.14; 5.15.

Indirect: ĪPVV on ĪPK 1.1.3, 1.5.11, 13; 2.4.20; 2.3.7-8.

86 (a) yadā tu tasya ciddharmavibhavāmodajr̥mbhayā। — ŚD 1.7cd; ŚDVr̥ p.
10: āmodaś camatkāraḥ; (b) yadā nr̥paḥ sārvabhaumaḥ prabhāvāmodabhāvitaḥ
।। — ŚD 1.37cd; ŚDVr̥: 29: prabhāvāmodabhāvitaḥ [yathā]
aiśvarya-camatkāra-vāsitaḥ.

87 vibhavāmodabāhulyam asyāthavoktā nimittatā । — ŚDVr̥ on 3.95ab; ŚDVr̥:
139-40: [viśvātmatāprasaraṇarūpavibhavā]’’svādo [’parisamāpto . . .].

88 yāti vyāptiṁ tathābhūtāṁ śāmyad āmodasatkriyām । śāntānandavapuḥ
svacchaḥ urarīkr̥tadr̥kkriyaḥ ।। — ŚD 7.20. Utpala’s commentary on this
portion is lost, hence no view can be formed as to Utpala’s stand. As
regards Somānanda, it pertains to the stage following the state of
“lysis in the perfect consciousness” (cillaya) where the
blissful/refined activity in the form of āmoda gets somewhat subdued or
calms down.

89 Compare pratyavamarśaḥ svātmacamatkāralakṣaṇaḥ (ĪPV I: 250) which is
glossed by Bhāskara: svātmacamatkāralakṣaṇaḥ aham iti
svaviṣayāsvādarūpaḥ । — Bhās. I: 250. In Somānanda this state represents
the initial moment of will, i.e. consciousness (ŚD 1.8).

90 Soma’s bhāvitaḥ is glossed with vāsitaḥ (infused/informed with,
perfumed by, seasoned with, steeped in).

91 tathā prabhuḥ pramodātmā krīḍaty evaṁ tathā tathā ।। — ŚD 1.38 cd.

92 ŚD 1.12ab; also see above nn 86-88.

93 harṣānusārī spandaḥ krīḍā । — ŚDVr̥: 29

94 tasyāmodaś camatkāras tathāsvarūpaparāmarśarūpas tasya jr̥mbhā
viśvātmatayā vikasanam । yad uktaṁ mayā stotre “[. . .] viśvam āmr̥śasi
rūpamāmr̥śan । yatsvayaṁ nijarasena ghūrṇase [. . .]” (ŚSĀ 13.15) iti ।
ghūrṇanaṁ jr̥mbhoktā । — ŚDVr̥: 10. I confess my inability to
satisfactorily render ghūrṇana in English. There is a word in Hindi,
i.e. jhūmanā, which seems quite close to ghūrṇana. Jhūmanā represents a
rhythmic swinging movement of head and body indicating rapturous and
ecstatic state of mind. This particular formulation could have been
avoided but for the fact that Abhinavagupta makes a lot of this
formulation while discovering certain interconnectivities to which I
will have occasion to point out (p. 148), and also the reason that this
verse immediately follows the verse (i.e. ŚSĀ 13.14), where Utpala makes
a pointed reference to the notion of camatkāra. Moreover, Kṣemarāja in
his Vivr̥ti faithfully recaptures Utpala’s spirit and word in the ŚDVr̥
under reference: tathāsvarūpam āmr̥śan, nijaṁ svarūpaṁ camatkurvan
nikhilaṁ viśvam āmr̥śasi āsvādanena ānandaghanaṁ ghaṭayasi । yaś ca
svayaṁ nijena cidrasena ghūrṇase pūrṇatvāt samucchalattayā spandase । —
p. 206.

95 mahāmantramayaṁ naumi rūpaṁ te svacchaśītalam । apūrvāmodasubhagaṁ
parāmr̥tarasolvaṇam ।। — ŚSĀ 2.26. āmoda is glossed with parimala by
Kṣemarāja: apūrveṇa āmodena, alaukikena vyāpinā parimalena hlādinā
svarūpeṇa — ŚSĀ-Vivr̥tī, p. 34. Kṣemarāja’s immediate justification would
lie in complying with Utpala’s implied imagery of “clean, cool, fragrant
and pleasant” form of Śiva. However, camatkāra would be more natural
with mahāmantramaya and parāmr̥tarasolvaṇa rūpa of the Lord.

96 antarbhakticamatkāracarvaṇāmīlitekṣaṇaḥ । namo mahyaṁ śivāyeti
pūjayan syāṁ tr̥ṇāny api ।। — ŚSĀ 5.15 [“With my eyes closed / Repeatedly
savouring (lit. chewing) the relish of my inner devotion / May I worship
even the blades of grass thus: / Homage to Śiva, that is me.”] — tr.
Bailly with minor modifications.

97 yatsamastasubhagārthavastuṣu sparśamātravidhinā camatkr̥tim । tāṁ
samarpayati tena te vapuḥ pūjayanty acalabhaktiśālinaḥ ।। — ŚSĀ 13.14
[“That which bestows on all objects of beauty / The property of giving
marvellous taste at the mere touch — / By that very principle do those
endowed with / Unwavering devotion / Worship your form.” — tr. Bailly
with minor modifications].

As I have indicated earlier, I do not equate camatkr̥ti with wonder —
notwithstanding some amount of marvelling inherent in it — as regards
the Kashmir Śaivite scheme. Here, for the expression subhagārthavastuṣu,
Kotru’s translation “to all objects of fascinating significance” (p. 80)
is closer to Kṣemarāja and Rājānaka Lakṣmaṇa (pp. 204-05:
subhagaprayojanāny eva samastāni vastūni teṣu viṣayabhūteṣu — Kṣemarāja;
sundara prayojana vālī sabhī vastuoṅ ke viṣaya meṁ — Rājānaka Lakṣmaṇa),
but Bailly’s rendering “on all objects of beauty” seems to me nearer to
Utpala. In this case I will construe the text as subhageṣu arthavastuṣu
as compared to subhagārtheṣu vastuṣu, presumably adopted by Kṣemarāja
and Rājānaka Lakṣmaṇa.

98 prakāśasya mukhya ātmā pratyavamarśaḥ taṁ vinā artha-bheditākārasya
apy asya svacchatāmātraṁ na tv ajāḍyaṁ camatkr̥ter abhāvāt । [Reflective
awareness is the primary essence of light. In the absence of that,
though light might have form(s) differentiated by objects, it would have
mere lucidity but no sentience (lit. non-insentience), because of the
lack of savouring.]

99 (nanu vimarśābhāvāt jaḍatā syāt iti vaktavye) “camatkr̥ter abhāvāt”
iti (kathaṁ vr̥ttiḥ/camatkr̥tir hi bhuñjānasya yā kriyā bhogasamāpattimaya
ānandaḥ, sa ucyate ity āśaṅkyāha) “sa eva ca” iti (yaḥ prakāśasya
prāṇatvena uktaḥ) । [. . .] (tasmāt yuktam āha) “camatkr̥ter abhāvāt” ।
[. . .] “viśeṣaprītiḥ” (ity atra) “viśeṣapratītir” iti (apareṣāṁ pāṭhaḥ)
। “ata eva” iti (yato vimarśa eva camatkāraḥ, sa eva ca ajāḍyaṁ tato
hetoḥ) [. . .] pramātary eva viśrāmyati । — ĪPVV II: 177-79

100 Mark the discussion that begins with citation from the Vr̥tti:
(“camatkr̥ter abhāvāt” iti kathaṁ vr̥ttiḥ) ends in “tasmāt yuktam āha
camatkr̥ter abhāvāt.” Vide note above.

101 This formulation of camatkāra comes from Abhinvagupta, but I am
tempted to ascribe it to Utpala. The Vivr̥ti does not define camatkāra.
In fact, despite the frequent positing of the term camatkāra nowhere it
is defined directly by Utpala except once in the Vr̥tti (4.1.6) in terms
of activity replete with supreme light (of consciousness) and bliss or
the luminous blissful activity (paramaprakāśānandamayī kriyā) (see n 141
also). Abhinavagupta’s formulation comes as an intermediary remark
contextualizing the citations from the Vivr̥ti between camatkr̥ter abhāvāt
and sa eva ca. The force of sa eva ca (i.e. “and that very ānanda”, that
is the same as the activity of a savouring agent: bhuñjānasya kriyā),
whose instant referent is Abhinavagupta’s definitive explanation, lends
support to my conjecture, howsoever hypothetical it might appear to be.
Besides, Utpala’s single “once only” formulation alluded to above might
also be relied upon as lending direct support.

102 See n 99 above.

103 etad uktaṁ bhavati । — ĪPVV II: 177.

104 ananyāpekṣa(read °kṣi°)tā ca eṣaiva yat svātmīyavimarśe ’ham iti
bhoktr̥tāmaye avicchinne bhuñjānatātmani camatkāre rūḍhiḥ ।

— ĪPVV II: 175

105 pramātr̥bhāgam eva pradhānatayā vimr̥śan bhuñjāna iti ucyate । — ĪPVV
II: 178

106 tatra vītavighnatvād eva asau rasanā carvaṇā nirvr̥tiḥ pratītiḥ
pramātr̥tāviśrāntir eva tata eva hr̥dayena parāmarśalakṣaṇena prādhānyāt
vyapadeśyā vyavasthitasyāpi prakāśabhāgasya vedyaviśrāntasya anādaraṇāt
sahr̥dayatā ucyate । — ibid.

107 nirvighnāḥ svādarūpāś ca rasanātad(emend rasanāḥ tad°)gocarīkāryāś
cittavr̥ttayo rasā nava [. . .] । — ibid.: 179. This seems to be the
portion of the text which Abhinavagupta identifies by uktam anyatra in
his ĪPVV on 2.4.20 (III: 251): °vighnavirahita eva āsvādo rasanātmā
camatkāra iti uktam anyatra. See n 116 below.

108 Rastogi: “Quintessentiality of Camatkāra in Rasa-experience:
Revisiting Abhinavagupta”, in Rastogi (ed.), 2013b: 438.

109 saṁvedanarūpatānāntarīyakatvena avasthitasya svatantrasyaiva
rasanaikaghanatayā parāmarśaḥ paramānando nirvr̥tiś camatkāra ucyate । —
ĪPVV I: 179. I venture to make a conjecture here that by equating
camatkāra with nirvr̥ti, Abhinavagupta is trying to restore Utpala’s
connection with Somānanda. Similarly, equation with paramānanda connects
him with the VBh and Bhaṭṭa Nārāyaṇa’s SC. See in the sequel, specially
n 145 below.

110 Vide nn 99 and 100.

111 Ibid.

112 vāstave ’pi cidekatve na syād ābhāsabhinnayoḥ ।
cikīrṣālakṣaṇaika-tvaparāmarśaṁ vinā kriyā ।। [Even if the unity of
consciousness is maintained to be the only ultimate reality, there
cannot be action, for two entities divided as regards the nature of
their manifestation (ābhāsabhinnayoḥ), without a preliminary act of
thought which grasps and establishes the unity (ekatvaparāmarśaṁ)
characterized by the desire to act. — tr. Torella]

113 jaḍasyāpy asti bhavati ity asyām api sattākriyāyāṁ bubhūṣāyogena
svātantryābhāvāt akartr̥tvam । [An insentient reality cannot even be the
agent of the action of being — “(it) exists, is” — since it does not
possess the freedom that is manifested through “willing to be”
(bubhūṣāyogena). — tr. Torella, with modification]

114 (tat kathaṁ vr̥ttau uktaṁ) “svātantryābhāvāt” iti । (atra āha)
“svātantryam” ityādi [. . .] (tac ca jaḍānāṁ nāsti iti yuktaiva yuktiḥ)

“svātantryābhāvāt” iti । (prakāśasya ca paradaśāyāṁ camat-kāramātrātmā
yo vimarśas tad eva svātantryaṁ) [. . .]; parāparatve tu [. . .]
aparadaśāyāṁ tad eva [. . .] iti darśayati) “prakāśo’pi” (ityādinā)
“cikīrṣaiva” (ityantena) । “camatkāro hi” iti । [. . .] “camad”* iti [.
. .] [. . .] camatkāra iti uktam anyatra । — ĪPVV III: 251.

* The editors of the KSS edition do not print camad in bold and take it
as part of Abhinavagupta’s text. It could be so, but since camad is
immediately coming after camatkāro hi and is followed by iti, then
followed by Abhinavagupta’s extensive hermeneutics of the word, I
tentatively take it as a part of Utpala’s text with a question mark.

From here onwards the next leg of the Vivr̥ti begins. The relevant
portion is given below: “evam” iti [. . .] (paradaśāyāṁ nāsti
icchāvyavahāra iti [. . .] uktvā [. . .] śivadr̥ṣṭimatāvalambanena āha)
“athavā” iti । [. . .] “saiva hi iti ।” (camatkāritā hi [. . .] sarvatra
icchā । ) [. . .] “ādi”**grahaṇāt (abhilāṣamalaṁ) [. . .] (evam anyad
anusartavyam) “tadabhāvaś ca” iti (svātantryābhāvasya nimittam ukta
icchābhāva iti saṁgatiḥ ।) — ĪPVV III: 251-52.

** As per printed edition ādi is part of Abhinavagupta’s commentary. But
this has no meaning — it has to be a part either of the Vr̥tti or the
Vivr̥ti. Since it is not there in the Vr̥tti, its presence in the Vivr̥ti
should be presumed.

115 For detailed discussion on Abhinavagupta’s exegetical and semantic
analysis of the word camatkāra see Rastogi: “Quintessentiality of
Camatkāra in Rasa-experience: Revisiting Abhinavagupta”, in Rastogi
(ed.), 2013b: 436-37.

116 kāvyanāṭyarasādāv api [. . .] °vighnarahita eva āsvādo rasanātmā
camatkāra iti uktam anyatra । — ĪPVV III: 251. Uktam anyatra refers to
Abhinavagupta’s ĪPVV on 1.5.11. See n 107 above.

117 prakāśasya ca paradaśāyāṁ camatkāramātrātmā yo vimarśas tad eva
svātantryaṁ, na tu icchārūpaṁ; parāparatve tu tadicchārūpam
iṣyamāṇonmeṣāt, aparadaśāyāṁ tad eva apūrṇam iti darśayati “prakāśo ’pi”
ityādinā “cikīrṣaiva” ityantena । — ĪPVV III: 251

118 camatkāramātrātmā yo vimarśas tad eva svātantryam । — ibid.

119 rasyataikaprāṇo hy asau na prameyādisvabhāvaḥ । tarhi sūtre
niṣpattir iti katham? neyaṁ rasasya । api tu tadviṣayarasanāyāḥ ।
tanniṣpattyā tu yadi tadekāyattajīvitasya rasasya niṣpattir ucyate na
kaścid atra doṣaḥ । — ABh I: 285. For translation see Gnoli 1968: 85-86
(and also fn 1, 86).

120 “evam” iti parimāṇaśūnye paradaśāyāṁ nāsti icchāvyavahāra iti
śāntaśivādipravādābhiprāyeṇa uktvā sadā śaktirūpāviṣṭa eva śiva ity
evaṁbhūtadarśanāśrayaśivadr̥ṣṭimatāvalambanena āha “athavā” iti ।
sarvatra hi camatkāra eva icchā, sa ca parabhūmāv api asti । yad uktaṁ
’tade(read tadi)cchā tāvatī (ŚD 1.3) । — ĪPVV III: 251-52. Compare this
with Utpala’s ŚDVr̥: 7: parāvasthāyāṁ punaḥ pūrṇo ’ham ity eva
svasvabhāvaḥ prakāśate, tāvatprakāśatvāt tad eva jñānaṁ,
saṁrambharūpatvāt saiva kriyā, tatsvabhāvatvena tadabhyupagamād icchāpi
sthitaiva tad icchā tāvatīti.

121 Vide preceding note.

122 “saiva hi” iti । camatkāritā hi bhuñjānarūpatā svātmaviśrāntilakṣaṇā
sarvatra icchā । — ĪPVV III: 252

123 See ĪPVV III: 252. Gnoli 1968: 60-61, n 4 cites and translates this
portion in full. For our immediate purpose it is not necessary to go
over these details.

124 ādigrahaṇād abhilāṣamalo yatra bhāvāntaraṁ sāmānyākāram api
vāsanāvaśeṣamātreṇa āste, yathāha ’bhāvasthitāni jananān-tarasauhr̥dāni’
(Abhijñāna-Śākuntala 5.2) । autsukyaṁ ca [. . .] । evam anyad
anusartavyam । — ibid.

125 [. . .] sa eva sādhāraṇībhāvaḥ sutarāṁ puṣyati । ata eva
sarvasāmājikānām ekaghanatayā pratipattiḥ sutarāṁ rasaparipoṣāya । —
ABh, I: 279.

126 sarveṣāmanādivāsanācitrīkr̥tacetasāṁ vāsanāsaṁvādāt । — ibid.

It is to be noted that Abhinavagupta illustrates both these places (vide
nn 124 and 126) with the same verse (5.2) of Abhijñāna-Śākuntala
highlighting their interconnection.

127 sthāyitvaṁ caitāvatām eva । jāta eva jantur iyatībhiḥ saṁvidbhiḥ
parīto bhavati । — ABh I: 282

128 “tadabhāvaś ca” iti svātantryābhāvasya nimittam ukta icchābhāva iti
saṅgatiḥ । — ĪPVV III: 252

129 iyatā vr̥ttir ubhayathā gamitā — bubhūṣāyogena yat svātantryaṁ tasya
abhāvāt; ayogena ca yaḥ svātantryābhāvas tataḥ । — ibid.

130 camatkāro hi svātmani ananyāpekṣe viśramaṇam । evaṁ bhuñjānatārūpaṁ
camat-tvaṁ, tad eva karoti saṁrambhe, vimr̥śati na anyatra anudhāvati । —
ĪPVV III: 251

131 camatkāritā hi bhuñjānarūpatā svātmaviśrāntilakṣaṇā sarvatra icchā ।

— ibid.: 252

132 “ekā” iti । [. . .] tat sarvaṁ (i.e. grāhyagrāhakabhāvam) kroḍīkr̥tya
avatiṣṭhamānā, na tu śaktimadrūpaparamaśivadaśā iva
anunmiṣitagrāhyagrāhakādivaicitryā, ata eva bhagavataḥ svābhogaṁ prati
ya āsvādaś camatkāro nijābhogaparāmarśātmā, tanmayī ।

— ibid. II: 189-90

133 ā samantāt bhogaḥ saṁvedanānantarbruḍitānantabhāvasaṁskāra-
madhyanimagnasya cidbhāvasya unmeṣaṇātmakapālanacar-vaṇavyāpāro
’nveṣaṇātmā । — ibid.: 25

134 yad āha “viśvam āmr̥śasi rūpam āmr̥śan” । (ŚSĀ13.15) — ibid.: 190.

135 Vide n 94 above.

136 na ca kadācid api parameśvara evaṁ tadrūpaśūnyaḥ । yad āhuḥ
parameṣṭhipādāḥ — “śānte śivatvaṁ [. . .] °śaktitritayasaṁgamaḥ ।।” (ŚD
3.55cd-56) evaṁ “parā” iti vyākhyāya [. . .] । — ibid.: 190

137 See ibid.: 206.

138 [. . .] “pratiṣṭhārūpā” iti [. . .] pratiṣṭhārūpeti prathamayā
“sāratayā” iti śabdena vidhir api sūcita iti vyākhyātam । [. . .] pūrvam
ardham anūdyamānārthatayā “sāratayā” iti ca hetutayā vyācakṣate । —
ibid.

139 “parameṣṭhinaḥ” iti (vyākhyāya) “sāratayā” iti (sūtre yad anuvadanaṁ
hetutayā hr̥dayatve sādhye, tat vyācaṣṭe) “yathā” iti “cetanaṁ pratiṣṭhā”
iti (saṁbandhaḥ) “cetanāvatāmapi” iti “yathā” iti (saṁbandhaḥ) [. . .]
(prakr̥te yojayati) “tathaiva” iti । “viśvacetanasya” iti (bhagavataḥ
paramaśivasya ity arthaḥ । sā parā vimarśaśaktiḥ parameśvarasya)
“pratiṣṭhā” iti (anena śabdena parameśvarasya) “hr̥dayam” iti (anena ca
śabdena vācyā) । — ĪPVV II: 205.

It may be seen, Utpala is here revisiting his ĪPK 1.1.4 (tathāhi
jaḍabhūtānāṁ pratiṣṭhā jīvadāśrayā । jñānaṁ kriyā ca bhūtānāṁ jīvatāṁ
jīvanaṁ matam ।।). The reader will do well to remember that, according
to Abhinavagupta, 1.1.4 marks the technical starting point of the ĪPK
text (vide ĪPV I: 61 thereon: “tathāhi” iti yuktyupakramaṁ dyotayati।).

140 “anyathā” iti । vimarśaśaktyā vinā mayūrāṇḍarasasya yā
nīlapītādinirbharatā sā yathā kāraṇatā, na tu kartr̥tā tathā bhagavato
’pi aśeṣaviśvanirbharatā syāt, na ca kāraṇatāmātraṁ yuktam iti bhāvaḥ ।
— ĪPVV II: 205.

141 As I pointed out in the n 101 above, Utpala’s treatment is quite in
line with his singular speaking definition of agency in terms of action
whose essence is “savouring” (camatkāra) characterized by supreme
luminosity and joy: īśvarasya anantakartr̥tā camatkārarūpā kriyoktā
paramaprakāśānandamayī । (Vr̥tti on 4.1.6). I am grateful to Torella for
bringing this portion of the Vr̥tti to light. I however take
camatkārarūpā as qualifying paramaprakāśānandamayī kriyā. Even
otherwise, when camatkārarūpā is taken as an adjective of anantakartr̥tā,
it has to be predicated by kriyā. It may be remembered that the Vivr̥ti
does not take cognizance of this formulation in the Vr̥tti and also that
the context here lacks any aesthetic reference. It is however immaterial
since the primary conceptual focus of Utpala remains consistently the
same.

142 “pūrṇa” iti [. . .] yaś camatkāra ānandātmā paramo bhogaḥ । — ĪPVV
I: 85-86; see n 81 above.

143 “camatkr̥tirūpatvāt” iti ānandātmakaparamabhogaparyantā viśrāntir eva
hi viśuddhaṁ svātantryaṁ yatra pratighātaleśakr̥tam asvātantryaṁ manāg
api na śakyaṁ yena ’ātmānam ata eva’ iti (1.5.15), “svātantryāmuktam”
(1.5.16) ityādi vicitraṁ nirmāṇaṁ vakṣyamāṇam abhivyanakti । tataḥ [. .
.] hr̥dayaṁ sā bhagavataḥ । [. . .] “hr̥dayam eva” iti na atra upacaritaṁ
hr̥dayatvam, api tu mukhyam eveti bhāvaḥ । — ĪPVV II: 205-06

144 The Vr̥tti is glossing aham idam ity akhaṇḍāmarśabr̥ṁhitaḥ from the
Kārikā with akhaṇḍitagrāhakākhaṇḍitagrāhyamelanāca-matkāropabr̥ṁhitaḥ. I
will refer the reader for text and translation to Torella (1994: 73,
210) and also to the copious citations from the Vivr̥ti glossing the
Vr̥tti text. In his excellent translation Torella connects camatkāra with
each of the three components of the lengthy phrase (mahāpadaṁ as
Abhinavagupta calls it) namely akaṇḍitagrāhaka, akhaṇḍitagrāhya and
tanmelanā (“savouring” of the undivided perceiving subject, of the
undivided perceptible object and of the fusion of the two). I am however
inclined to think slightly differently. I take akaṇḍitagrāhaka as the
Vr̥tti’s explanation of ahaṁ, akhaṇḍitagrāhya as that of idam and
tanmelanācamatkāraḥ as that of akhaṇḍāmarśa. Unfortunately there is no
citation from the Vivr̥ti in ĪPVV on this kārikā on camatkāra, nor does
Abhinavagupta offer any comment, hence this interpretation may be of
only tentative value.

145 Initially I had my reservations going over and over again over
Abhinavagupta’s thorough insights, I am now convinced that he sees
Somānanda as Utpala’s inspiration behind initiating the latter’s notion
of camatkāra and also that Abhinavagupta’s comprehensive build up of
camatkāra as quintessence of his own aesthetic theory is fully
sanctioned and endorsed by his core scholastic tradition. See also n
109.

146 Torella translates it as “conscious beautitude”.

147 (tat yuktam uktaṁ) “tathā svayaṁ prakāśate” iti । — ĪPVV II: 181

148 evaṁ pāramārthikam aham iti prakāśasya nirvr̥tirūpaṁ vapuḥ । — ĪPVV
II: 181. In my rendering pāramārthikaṁ qualifies vapuḥ. Alternatively it
could also qualify ahaṁ.

149 Vide ibid.: 180-81.

150 Vide “camatkr̥ter abhāvāt” [. . .] “viśeṣaprītiḥ” [. . .] “anyathā”:
extracts from Vivr̥ti. — ĪPVV II: 179.

151 “anyathā” iti (yadi pramātari viśrāmyed ity arthaḥ । etac ca ‘kintu
mohavaśāt’ — 1.1.3 iti sūtre prakāśavimarśavailakṣaṇyaṁ nirūpitam eva)
“vimarśaḥ punar na kadācid idantābhūmim āskandati” (ity atra avasare) ।
“tathā ca” iti (yataḥ sarvo vimarśaḥ pramātary eva viśrāntim āśrayate
tena prakāreṇa ।) — ĪPVV II: 179-80. It should be noted that (i)
Abhinavagupta is demonstrating Utpala’s deliberate attempt to revisit
the contents of 1.1.3 and see 1.5.11 as continuation thereof; (ii) the
text, e.g. vimarśaḥ punar na kadācid idantābhūmim āskandati, appearing
as part of the ĪPVV, is actually from the Vivr̥ti and appears on p. 83,
vol. I of the ĪPVV; (iii) tathā ca from the Vivr̥ti recapitulates what
has been said in the Vivr̥ti on 1.1.3; and (iv) this tathā ca is
recaptured and re-endorsed by tathā in “tathā svayaṁ prakāśate” (II:
181) which is the starting point of the present discussion.

152 (tat katham uktaṁ) “vimarśo na kadācid idantābhūmim āskandati” (ity
āśaṅkyāha) “svato ’pi viśuddhasya” iti । [. . .] “śuddhasya” iti
(kartari ṣaṣṭhī) । śuddhatvena [. . .] (pramātur viśeṣa ukto ’ham ity
avicchedaprakāśaviśrāntilakṣaṇaḥ । ata eva camato bhuñjānasya karaṇaṁ
saṁrambho ’ham asau nīlāder bhokteti ।) [. . .] (atra hetuḥ) “jaḍa” iti
। (jaḍāt hi cetanasya vimarśakr̥ta eva viśeṣaḥ । — ĪPVV I: 83. Here, as
pointed out in the preceding note, the sentence vimarśaḥ [. . .]
āskandati is from the Vivr̥ti as is made clear by Abhinavagupta’s
cross-reference, though at both the places the editors of the KSS
edition print it as forming part of Abhinavagupta’s ĪPVV.

153 Vide n 147 above.

154 tac ca yatra āropyate, tad api nirvr̥timayam eva bhāti śarīraprāṇādi
। tad āha “aham ity api” iti । — ĪPVV II: 181

155 sā cāvighnā saṁvit camatkāras tajjo ’pi
kampapulakollaka-sanādirvikāraḥ camatkāraḥ । — ABh I: 279; also see n 84
above.

156 tathāhi duḥkham api ayam āsvādayamāno ’ntar eva viśrāmyati । tāṁ tu
antarviśrāntiṁ bāhyena arthī taṁ ca vinaṣṭam abhisamīkṣamāṇo
’nādaratiraskr̥tatvāt satīm api na abhimanute । upadeśaviśeṣadiśā tu
māyāvigalane tadbāhyarūpānādaraṇe saiva viśrāntir unmiṣati । tathā hi
śivadr̥ṣṭiḥ “duḥkhe’pi pravikāsena” ityādi । — ŚD 5.9c. The citation by
Abhinavagupta calls for a few comments. By suffixing ityādi (instead of
usual iti he implies inclusion of the immediately following related
discussion in the ŚD. The relative two verses run like this: duḥkhādinā
viśeṣaś cet tatrāpy aśivatā na ca । duḥkhe ’pi pravikāsena duḥkhārthe
dhr̥tisaṁgamāt ।। dr̥śyate bandhanaṁ teṣu dhr̥tiḥ kīṭādike tathā । nirvr̥tyā
yatra yogo ’sti tatraiva śivatā sphuṭam ।। — ŚD 5.9-10. [(Should someone
doubt that) pain will entail difference/change in the blissful nature of
Śiva. (The answer is) No, it will not lead to loss of śivatā (i.e.
essential nature of Śiva). Since in pain also endurance (dhr̥ti)
constantly marks the object/source of pain through the blossoming (of
the essential nature of Śiva). (I do not translate the third line).
Wherever there is contact with sublime blissfulness (nirvr̥ti) śivatā is
indeed visible right there.] The sole purpose behind this long quotation
is to underline the essential connection between nirvr̥ti and pravikāsa
and the rationale behind Abhinavagupta’s deliberate choice of this
passage from the ŚD while alluding to nirvr̥ti as a precursor idea of
Utpala’s camatkāra.

In fact, Somānanda in the current context is laying down the doctrine of
consciousness-expansion or, in other words, that of the expanded
consciousness which is going to prove central to Utpala’s and
Abhinavagupta’s aesthetic insights. Just a few, precisely two, verses
prior in the ŚD he delineates that all the instances and categories of
phenomenal existence, which even when constrained by contraction in
themselves, remain always endowed with expansiveness, joyfulness and
blissfulness (sarve svātmaparicchedavanto nityam avasthitāḥ ।
vikāsāhlādavantaś ca sarve nirvr̥tiyoginaḥ) ।। — ŚD 5.6 (See Torella
1994: 90, n 3, for alluding to this kārikā in a different context.) This
hemistich (duḥkhe ’pi pravikāsena) actually proved to be a catalyst of
whole chain of thought from Somānanda to Abhinavagupta in viewing
categories of all descriptions not only in the objective world but also
in the subjective realm as modes of expanded consciousness flooded with
joy. In the Parātriṁśikā-Vivaraṇa Abhinavagupta holds in unequivocal
terms that the states of anger, delusion, etc. happen to be an
expression of the absolutic consciousness and leans back on Somānanda
for support citing him thrice, the final quotation being: duḥkhe ’pi
pravikāsena sthairyārthe dhr̥tisaṁgamāt । — (ŚD 5.9cd) [In pain also the
purpose is steadiness through the efflorescence of the essential nature
by means of endurance” — tr. Jaideva Singh.] Abhinavagupta concludes
that the states of anger, etc. exist because of their being one with
savouring of/by consciousness (ciccamatkāra), otherwise they would not
be able even to attain their nature: [. . .] krodhamohādivr̥ttayo hi
paripūrṇabhagavadbhairavabhaṭṭārakasaṁvidātmikā eva । yad uktaṁ
śrīsomānandapādaiḥ [. . .] ’duḥkhe ’pi pravikāsena sthairyārthe
(duḥkhārthe KSS) dhr̥tisaṁgamāt ।’ ityādi । — PTV: 41-42. Moving forward,
Abhinavagupta continues to enlarge upon the concept lending to it more
depth on the aesthetic side. According to him, complete lack of
savouring, i.e. delight, means insentiency. Absorption in the profuse
delightful savouring alone marks the aesthetic susceptibility
(sahr̥dayatā). In grief also, there is the same savouring experience.
Grief, having fully thickened (vikāsam āpannaṁ: matured, expanded) due
to utter despair, turns into delightful experience (because of the
expansion of its essential nature as consciousness). At this point,
Abhinavagupta looks up to the same statement of Somānanda: duḥkhe’pi
pravikāsena (ŚD 5.9c): sarvato hi acamatkāre jaḍataiva
adhikacamatkārāveśa eva [. . .] sahr̥dayatā ucyate [. . .] duḥkhe ’pi eṣa
eva camatkāraḥ, [. . .] tad eva [. . .] vikāsam āpannaṁ iti
nairapekṣyavaśasaviśeṣacamatkriyātmaduḥkhasatattvam । taduktam ’duḥkhe
’pi pravikāsena’ iti । — PTV: 49.

Abhinavagupta’s obsession with this formulaton of Somānanda is so
deep-rooted that he leaves no opportunity towards dwelling on this idea
sourcing the same to precisely this kārikā. What makes it all the more
interesting is that he does so in the contexts provided by Utpala. Under
ĪPK 1.4.5 Abhinavagupta is discussing the Vivr̥ti’s relegation of the
notion of pleasure, propounded by the Pramāṇa-Viniścaya, as belonging to
the subject identified with intellect (buddhipramātā) who is not a real
subject (vāstavapramātā): (yad āha) “idam eva hi naḥ sukhaṁ yat sātaṁ
saṁvedanam” iti । (etat pratikṣipati) “na ca” iti । [. . .] “vāstava”
iti [. . .] (tata uktaṁ) “na sukhitvādi” iti । — ĪPVV II: 47-49. On the
contrary the real subject even during the worldly existence (where the
empirical subject gets occasional entrenchment in his intrinsic
spiritual identity) has a feel of inner joy even when he undergoes
painful experience. In fact, pain and pleasure become synonymous in such
a situation. Explaining the word tadā (then) Abhinavagupta quotes ŚD 5.9
and also highlights that this happens because of the specialized
training or teaching (upadeśabalena). In so doing he brings the insights
of the VBh and ŚD on the same axis: “tadā” iti
(vāstavapramātrāveśadaśāyāṁ, yadi vā) “tadā” iti (sukhaduḥkhotpādāvasare
yo lokasya tatra tatra । te hi “saṁbandhe sāvadhānatā ।’ [VBh 106] ity
upadeśabalena svarūpavimarśadraḍhimani viśrāmyantaḥ parānandena yujyante
। yathoktam ‘ānande mahati prāpte dr̥ṣṭe vā bāndhave cirāt ।’ [VBh 71]
ityādi ‘duḥkhe ’pi ca vikāse ’pi sthairyārthaṁ dhr̥tisaṁgamāt ।’ [ŚD 5.9]
ityādi ca) । — ĪPVV II: 50

157 tata eva hr̥dayena parāmarśalakṣaṇena prādhānyāt vyapadeśyā
vyavasthitasya api prakāśabhāgasya vedyaviśrāntasya anādaraṇāt
sahr̥dayatā ucyate । — ibid.: 178-79

158 pramātr̥bhāgam eva pradhānatayā vimr̥śan bhuñjāna iti ucyate । —
ibid.: 178.

159 From now on Abhinavagupta does not name Somānanda. My only reason in
believing that he is presenting his great grand-teacher’s view is
because of its contextual placement. It begins just after citation from
Somānanda as a part of the continuing narrative of Utpala that begins
with “tathā svayaṁ prakāśate” iti । [. . .] (tad āha) “aham ity api” iti
। and closes just after presentation of these views: (etad upasaṁharati)
“tadevam” iti । This is followed by (etat saṁvādayati) “tathā ca” iti
“bhartr̥harir ity avocat” iti (saṁbandhaḥ). Abhinavagupta wants us to
appreciate that Utpala is demonstrating full backing of the tradition
that he enjoys. The ideas of Somānanda figure as endorsement from his
own tradition and those of Bhartr̥hari as that from a different but
complementing ally.

160 ye tu śarīrādititīkṣavas te taditarasvargādigataśarīravāñchayā vā
taccharīrāvinābhāviniṣpratīkāraduḥkhajihāsayā aham iti camatkārādhyāsaṁ
tatra śarīre śithilayanti, śarīrāntare ca taṁ camatkārāgraham
abhisaṁcārayanti, pāramārthikīm eva tu camatkārānandadaśāṁ vītavighnam
eva avalilambiṣante mumūrṣudaśāpannāḥ । — ĪPVV II: 181-82.

161 ity ayam artho ’bhinavabhāratyāṁ nāṭyavedavivr̥tau vitatya vyutpādito
’smābhir iti । tatkutūhalī tām eva avalokayeta । iha tu
prakr̥tavighnakāritvāt na vitataḥ । — ĪPVV II: 179

162 [. . .] nirvighnāḥ svādarūpāś ca rasanāḥ tadgocarīkāryāś
cittavr̥ttayo rasā nava ity ayam artho ’bhinavabhāratyāṁ [. . .] vitatya
vyutpāditaḥ [. . .] । — ibid. The printed text is rasanātad° which I
separate as above. I am guided by Pandey’s MS reading cited in Pandey
1950: 94(n1), 422: [. . .] nirvighnāsvādarūpā ca rasanā ।
tadgocarīkāryāḥ [. . .]. । In the second edition he retains this reading
though he refers to the KSTS edition of ĪPVV [Pandey 1959: 141, 639]
without highlighting this deviation. Left to me, I prefer Pandey’s
reading which has rasanā as a generic term. Here rasanāḥ in plural takes
an analytic view of the same with reference to their respective content.
The plural in rasanāḥ is necessitated by plural in nirvighnāḥ and
svādarūpāśca which qualify and describe it.

163 ullekhasya sukhādeś ca prakāśo bahirātmanā । icchāto bhartur
adhyakṣarūpo ’kṣyādibhuvāṁ yathā ।। [It is by the will of the Lord that
what is pictured up in imagination and pleasure etc., shine externally,
exactly as do the (external) objects of sense-perception etc., which are
directly perceptible. tr. Pandey.]

164 [. . .] “sukhādeś ca” samastasya bharatādyuktasya
sthāyivyabhicāricittagaṇasya [. . .] yat prakāśanam । — ĪPVV II: 429

165 sukhaduḥkhaprāyās tu bharatādyuktarūpāḥ sthāyivyabhicārirūpā
ratinirvedādayo ’ntaḥkaraṇaikagocarībhūtā bahirātmanā bhānti ।

— ĪPV I: 419-20

166 tasmāt sūtrārthaṁ [. . .] samyag vyākhyāsye । — ĪPV, benedictory
verse 5

167 ullekhasukhaduḥkhalajjādīnāṁ [. . .] sākṣātkaraṇarūpo [. . .] । —
ĪPVr̥ on 1.8.9. It may be noted that though Abhinavagupta does not
specifically mention duḥkha in the ĪPVV while glossing sukhādeḥ,
Utpala’s intention becomes transparent in the Vr̥tti as above, which
takes duḥkha and lajjā both and even others, implied by ādi (sukhādeḥ).
Abhinavagupta’s remark (vide nn 164-65 above) is a kind of reproduction
of the Vr̥tti.

168 “atadrūpāc ca” iti lajjā hi na sukhaṁ, na duḥkhaṁ, cittavr̥ttiviśeṣaś
ca । evam utkaṇṭhādau vācyam । — ĪPVV II: 430

169 ullekhaḥ utprekṣayā likhyamāna ākāraḥ । — ibid.: 425

170 Vide ĪPVr̥ on 1.8.8. For text see n. 171 below.

171 “antaḥ” iti agalitasvabhāva eva ahantāyāṁ saṁskārarūpatayā sthita
ityarthaḥ । — ĪPVV II: 430

172 ullekhaś ca utprekṣaṇena svavyāpāreṇa utkīryeva arthād utkr̥ṣyeva
likhyamānaś citrakalpaś chāyāmātrarūpo vā । — ĪPVV I: 252

173 vikalpe yo ’yam ullekhaḥ so ’pi bāhyaḥ pr̥thakprathaḥ ।
pra-mātraikātmyamāntaryaṁ tato bhedo hi bāhyatā ।। — ĪPK 1.8.8; vikalpe
ghaṭādyullekhaś cakṣurādyagocaro ’pi pr̥thagābhāsād bāhya eva ।
ahaṁvimarśo hy āntaratvam, idam iti tu bāhyatā । evaṁ ca ghaṭānām ubhayī
bāhyatā bāhyāntaḥkaraṇadvayīvedyatā, sukhādes tv ekāntaḥkaraṇavedyataiva
। — ĪPVr̥ thereon. [Even the mental representation (ullekha) which occurs
in the discursive thought (vikalpe) is external, because it appears in
terms of separation (pr̥thakprathaḥ). Indeed, internality is unity with
the knowing subject (pramātraikyam), externality is separation.

The mental representation of the jar, etc. in the sphere of discursive
thought, though not the object of the senses such as light, is none the
less external so far as it is manifested as separate (from the subject).
Indeed, internality is the reflective awareness “I” (ahaṁvimarśaḥ),
externality is the reflective awareness “this”. Thus for things — such
as the jar and so on — there are two kinds of externality, i.e. they are
the objects of cognition through both the external and internal senses;
for pleasure and so on there is one, in that they are cognized only by
the internal sense. — tr. Torella.]

174 “iti” iti yat pūrvam uktaṁ tato hetor idam avasthitaṁ yad
anubhūyamānasya smaryamāṇasya samullikhyamānasya ca ghaṭābhāsasya
vāstavam ekatvaṁ yogyatayā ca dvitayī bāhyatā asty eva bāhyatayā
bāhyendriyavedyatayā ceti । — ĪPVV II: 429. Mark the parity between
anubhūyamāna and samullikhyamāna.

175 nanu bāhyatādvitvanivedane sūtroktabāhyatāvibhāgaprakhyāpanayā
avaśyavaktavye “ghaṭādīnām” iti viśeṣaṇasya kiṁ vyāvartyam ity āśaṅkya
yā vr̥ttiḥ “sukhādes tu” ityādikā, tāṁ vivr̥ṇoti “sukhādeḥ punaḥ” iti ।
“aviśeṣa”-padapr̥ṣṭhe “mātra”-grahaṇaṁ dhyānollikhitagaruḍādau
pramātrantarāsādhāraṇyāviśeṣe ’pi yad ullikhitam aparaṁ bāhyatvam asti,
tad api nāsti sukhādau iti prakaṭīkartum । — ĪPVV II: 429. [The editors
of the KSS edition do not print ghaṭādīnām, aviśeṣa and mātra in bold
and within inverted commas as is their wont in indicating the Vivr̥ti’s
or Vr̥tti’s text. It is difficult to figure out the exact phrase in the
Vivr̥ti as regards aviśeṣa and mātra, but there is no doubt that they are
from the Vivr̥ti.] The long quotation makes it very clear that
Abhinavagupta is very emphatic in pointing out to this subtle
distinction within the two orders of mental entities and that this
distinction was made by Utpala himself. Despite the fact that the image
that appears in meditation is not open to other percipients like other
mental episodes, it is qualitatively different from pleasure, etc. as
the latter lacks the characterstic of (even potential)
sense-perceptibility which the former is endowed with.

176 ullekhasukhaduḥkhalajjādīnāṁ cākṣuṣān(emend ṇ)āṁ rūpādīnām iva
īśvarasya śaktyā sākṣātkaraṇarūpo bauddhaḥ prakāśaḥ । — ĪPVr̥ on 1.8.9
[The manifestation (prakāśaḥ) of mental representations and pleasure,
pain, shame, etc. that takes place through the mind (bauddaḥ) is no
different from that which, having the form of direct perception due to
the power of the Lord concerns those realities that can be perceived by
the eye, such as forms/colours, etc. — tr. Torella with modification.]

177 Vide, nn 163 and 176 above.

178 dr̥ṣṭāntaṁ vyācaṣṭe “cakṣurādi” iti । — ĪPVV II: 430

179 gāḍham ullikhyamāne tu vikalpena sukhādike । tathāsthitis tathaiva
syāt sphuṭam asyopalakṣaṇāt ।। — ĪPK1.8.4 [However, when the
(manifestation) pleasure, etc. is reproduced owing to intensive
repetition through mental discursion (vikalpena) then that state (of the
subject) comes about (in the subject) because of the distinctively vivid
experience of that (asya, i.e. pleasure manifestation: sukhābhāsa) — tr.
Torella, with modifications. (I take the genitive asya as karma, not
kartā, of upalakṣaṇa).] Vr̥tti on the above: kutaścit prayatnaviśeṣāt
svatantravikalpollikhitaṁ sphuṭam eva sukhādijātaṁ vikāsādihetuḥ । —
[Reproduced through an autonomous mental discursion with certain
(kutaścid) particular (type of) effort (prayatnaviśeṣād) pleasure etc.
becomes completely vivid and causes joy (lit. expansion), etc. — tr.
Torella, with modifications.]

180 According to the Vivr̥ti, ullekhana is re-vivification, i.e.
re-living in the present: “pratyupasthāpyate” iti vartamānābhāsīkriyate
। — ĪPVV, II: 410

181 na hi tadā asau smaryamāṇaḥ, api tu vartamāna eva sukhādyābhāsaḥ । —
ibid.

182 sukhābhāsalakṣaṇaṁ yat sāmānyasmaraṇena upasthāpitaṁ, tad eva yataḥ
sphuṭīkaroti nirantaro vikalpaḥ । — ĪPVV, II: 411. Without going into
detailed discussion on the perception-like characteristics of memory due
to repeated attention and its identification with meditation
(dhyānādibhāvaṁ smr̥tir eva labdhvā cintāmaṇis tadvibhavaṁ vyanakti —
cited in ĪPV I: 154 on ĪPK 1.4.1) and the capacity of autonomous mental
construct to evoke a fresh new perceptual experience of its object again
owing to pointed unbroken concentration, it seems to me that the fence
between the two modes of cognition and their respective objects is very
hazy. Utpala revisits the problem in his Vr̥tti and Vivr̥ti both on 1.4.2
and Abhinavagupta in his ĪPVV thereon. Abhinavagupta addresses this
issue once again in his ĪPV where he refers to the element of “absence
of openness to other percipients” (anyasādhāraṇyānavabhāsāt — ĪPV I:
160) being the catalyst of distinction between extremely vivid memory
and autonomous mental construct in visualizing the deity. But as
Abhinavagupta himself would have it that “absence of openness to other
percipients” is equally common to the autonomous mental construct and
meditational activity (dhyānollikhitagaruḍādau
pramātrantarāsādhāraṇyāviśeṣe ’pi — ĪPVV II: 429) as well, this
criterion becomes suspect and calls for further scrutiny. What is
extremely intriguing is that Utpala remains non-committal about his
stand whether this perception-like modality he considers logically
determinate or indeterminate (tadā ca vikalpatā syāt nirvikalpatā veti
nāsmākaṁ grahaḥ — Vivr̥ti on 1.4.2, in Torella 2007b: 548). The reason
for my taking a special call in this context comes from Abhinavagupta
himself, when in the ABh on NŚ 6.31 during the course of mooting the
notion of camatkāra he notices some kind of homology between mental
ascertainment in the nature of perception, retrospecting (saṅkalpa) and
memory with a pointed reference to Kālidāsa’s usage of the word smarati
(“remembers”): sa ca sākṣātkārasvabhāvo mānaso ’dhyavasāyo vā saṅkalpo
vā smr̥tir vā tathātvena sphurann astu । yad āha “ramyāṇi vīkṣya” [. . .]
tac cetasā smarati [. . .] (Śākuntala 5.2) (see Gnoli 1968: 60-61, for
translation and explanatory notes). Also see Rastogi 2012: 400-01.

183 Utpala wants his reader to know that this vividness that depends
upon the sense-contact or sense-perception contemporaneous with the
object (tātkālikākṣasāmakṣyasāpekṣāḥ — ĪPK 1.8.1) can be brought about
by intensely continuous concentration or attention alone by taking
resort to certain particularly dedicated effort for this purpose.
Utpala’s deployment of the phrase kutaścid prayatnaviśeṣāt in the Vr̥tti
(perhaps explaining tathaiva in the Kārikā) and the way it is exegeted
by the Vivr̥ti leaves no doubt about his intention: “kutaścit” iti
(vyadhikaraṇatayā pañcamyarthaṁ vyācaṣṭe) “upadeśa” ityādinā “āhitam”
ityantena । (kandasauṣumṇapadādyanupraveśaḥ upadeśaviśeṣaḥ,
āsaṅgo’nurāgaḥ, anyo heturadr̥ṣṭādiḥ) — ĪPVV II: 410. Here the Vivr̥ti
refers to its happening due to definitive teachings of certain yogic
practices or due to deep attachment/love or due to some other factors
such as unseen destiny (adr̥ṣṭa). The word “etc.” (ādi) highlights the
open-endedness of the usage. There is a motive to such an approach. The
prayatnaviśeṣa, we will see, covers the pheomena of intense devotion,
meditation and visualization through art. What is necessary is that
whatever the effort, the projection must be vivid as if occurring in the
present before the eyes and that it must be noticed/grasped
distinctively. The word upalakṣaṇāt is a pointer to it. If we recall
upalakṣite in ĪPK 1.1.3, the heart-filling nature of this perceptual
experience will come to the fore.

184 I agree with Torella’s rendering of vikāsa as joy (in virtue of its
being the arthakriyā of sukha). Gnoli (1968: 46-47) translates it with
“expansion” while rendering Abhinavagupta’s portion of the ABh on Bhaṭṭa
Nāyaka. The three states of mind (citta), namely, fluidity, enlargement
and expansion (druti, vistāra and vikāsa respectively:
drūtivistāravikāsalakṣaṇena [. . .] bhogena । — ABh I: 177) form
important part of any literary theory on rasa-perception. What Utpala
wanted to imply by the word ādi (etc.) in vikāsādihetuḥ is anybody’s
guess today. Did he include druti and vistāra also? Nobody knows. The
ĪPVV does not offer any clue. However, two conclusions could be drawn
safely: (i) vikāsa here does pertain to joy or joyous state of mind
owing to the immediate centrality of sukha (pleasure, joy) in the
present discussion: sukhādes tu yāvatī arthakriyā vivakṣitā sā pūrṇaiva
। (ĪPVV II: 411); and (ii) Somānanda and Utpala are fully familiar with
this notion of vikāsa. Former’s preoccupation with this notion has been
discussed in connection with camatkāra with special reference to ŚD 5.9.
However, he directly relates vikāsa (or vikāsitā) with power of joy or
blissful sublimity. Utpala makes it abundantly clear that proclivity
towards unqualified joy is vikāsa or state of expansiveness:
tatkarmanirvr̥tiprāptir aunmukhyaṁ tadvikāsitā । — ŚD 1.20ab; Utpala
comments: karmāvacchinnā nirvr̥ttir aunmukhyam anavacchinnanirvr̥timātram
ānandaśaktir iti yāvat । tad aunmukhyaṁ vikāsitā cidāsthāpravikāsa ity
uktam — ŚDVr̥: 17. Utpala clearly has ŚD 1.15 in his mind: bodhasya
svātmaniṣṭhasya racanāṁ prati nirvr̥tiḥ । tadāsthāpravikāso yas tad
aunmukhyaṁ pracakṣate ।।

185 Vide p. 100 and n 3 above.

186 Kumari S.S. Janaki agrees with me. Janaki in fact clinches the
issue. She emphatically concludes that the only compelling reason behind
Ruyyaka’s recognition of ullekha as a distinct figure was Utpala’s
phenomenological thought as propounded in his ĪPK. For Ruyyaka actually
encountered “trouble to establish it as a separate figure distinct from
rūpaka, bhrāntimān, atiśayokti and śleṣa with all of which it is found
in combination. Ruyyaka’s difficulty in this aspect is quite evident
from his discussion of the figure of speech in the passage yas tapovanam
iti munibhiḥ etc. from Harṣacarita quoted by him in this context.
According to Ruyyaka, the peculiar feature of viewing the same object in
different ways is to be seen only in ullekha. Even if it is found in
combination with any other figure, there is only the possibility of a
saṁkara of different alaṁkāras. Even in that case the need to recognize
ullekha as a distinct figure is not obviated. [. . .] Taking this cue
from Ruyyaka, later writers like Vidyādhara (Ekāvalī, p. 227), Appayya
Dīkṣita (Citra-Mīmāṁsā, p. 67) and Jagannātha Paṇḍita (Rasa-Gaṅgādhara,
p. 358) accept two varieties of ullekha — śuddha and saṅkīr̥ṇa. The
question naturally arises as to how and why the same object could be or
is viewed in different ways. In this connection Ruyyaka quotes the
verse: “yathāruci [. . .] °sādhite” which is [. . .] a śloka from [. .
.] Utpaladeva.” — Janaki 1965: 97-98

187 ekasyāpi nimittavaśād anekadhā grahaṇam ullekhaḥ । —
Alaṁkāra-Sarvasva, sūtra 19, p. 58 (NŚ edition).

188 ĪPK 1.8.4 and 1.8.8-9

189 yatraikaṁ vastv anekadhā gr̥hyate sa rūpabāhulyollekhanād ullekhaḥ ।
— Alaṁkāra-Sarvasva, p. 59

190 na cekaṁ nirnimittam ullekhamātram api tu
nānāvidha-dharmayogitvākhyanimittavaśād etat kriyate । tatra
rucyarthitvavyutpattayo yathāyogaṁ prayojikāḥ । — ibid.

191 tad uktam yathāruci yathārthitvaṁ yathāvyutpatti bhidyate ।।
ābhāso’py artha ekasminn anusaṁdhānasādhite ।।

— Alaṁkāra-Sarvasva, p. 59

192 uktam iti śrīpratyabhijñāyām । — AS-Vimarśinī p. 59.

193 svātantryeṇa vikalpanaṁ ruciḥ । arthakriyābhilāṣaparatvam arthitvam
। vr̥ddhavyavahāraśaraṇatā vyutpattiḥ । — ibid. The language of Jayaratha
replicates Abhinavagupta’s ĪPV II: 94: ruci svātantryam, arthitvam
arthakriyābhilāṣaparavaśatāṁ, vyutpattiṁ vr̥ddhavyavahāraśaraṇatāṁ ca
(anatikramya bhidyate eva ābhāsaḥ).

194 rucyarthavyutpattayaś ca prāyaśaḥ samastavyastā yojayituṁ śakyante ।
— ibid.

195 ekasminn eva caikapratyavamarśasāmarthyopapādite vastuni
svecchāvaśād arthitvānurodhād vā naipuṇavaśād vā avabhāsabhedaḥ । —
Vr̥tti on 2.3.3

196 yathā ‘yas tapovanam iti munibhiḥ kāmāyatanam iti veśyābhiḥ
saṁgītaśāleti lāsakaiḥ’ ityādi harṣacarite śrīkaṇṭhākhyajanapadavarṇane
atra hy eka eva śrīkaṇṭhākhyo janapadas tadguṇayogāt
tapovanādyanekarūpatayā nirūpitaḥ । — AS p. 59. The conjecture that the
Kashmir Śaivists seem to be conversant with Ruyyaka’s illustration and
also his rhetorical innovation of ullekha might be right.
Bhāskarakaṇṭha’s following observation on ĪPK 2.3.3 implicitly appears
to suggest the same: [. . .] arthāt tasminn ekatra vastuni ābhāsā
bhidyante anyathā harṣacarite ekasya śrīkaṇṭhākhyajanapadasya
saṅgītaśālādibhāvena varṇanāyogāt ।

— Bhās. II: 94

197 Vide Kane 1951: 131-32 Notes.

198 anekadhā grahaṇam iti na punar anekadhā kalpanam । grahaṇaṁ hi
svārasikyām utpāditāyāṁ ca pratipattau saṁbhavati na tu svārasikyām eva
। yadāhuḥ ‘ataḥ śabdānusandhānavandhyaṁ tadanubandhi vā ।
jātyādiviṣayagrāhi sarvaṁ pratyakṣam iṣyate ।’ — AS-Vimarśinī: 58-59

199 anusaṁdhānaṁ nāma bahūnāṁ viśeṣāṇāṁ guṇapradhānatayā vyāmiśraṇena
vimarśanam । — cited from Samudrabandha in Kane 1951: 132, Notes.

200 ullekhanaṁ nirdhāraṇam । — AS-Sañjīvinī (p.70) on ullekhanād in AS

201 rucyarthitvavyutpattyanusāreṇa ekasminn apy anusandhānena sādhite
nirdhārite ’rthe ābhāsaḥ pratītir bhidyate, nānollekhātmikā jāyata ity
arthaḥ । — ibid., p. 71

202 Pandey 1950: 10, 22-24, 142-49.

203 atra āha — rasa iti kaḥ padārthaḥ । ucyate — āsvādyatvāt । — NŚ,
prose text post 6.31.

204 sā caikavr̥ttiḥ [. . .]
nirvighnasvasaṁvedanātmaka(harṣa)-viśrāntilakṣaṇena rasanāparaparyāyeṇa
gr̥hyamāṇatvād rasaśabdena abhidhīyate । — ABh I: 266-67 on NŚ 6.15;
sthāyiśabdavyapadeśye rase āsvādyatā [. . .] pratītiviśeṣo rasanākriyeti
। — ibid.: 289; sarvathā rasanātmakavītavighnapratītigrāhyo bhāva eva
rasaḥ । — ibid.: 281

205 (a) sa ca sākṣātkārasvabhāvo mānaso ’dhyavasāyo vā saṅkalpo vā [. .
.] । — ibid.: 278

(b) parimitavibhāvādyunmīlane ’pi parisphuṭa eva sākṣātkārakalpaḥ
kāvyārthaḥ sphurati । — ibid.: 287

(c) kāvyārthaviṣaye hi pratyakṣakalpasaṁvedanodaye rasodayaḥ — ibid.:
29. The reader may note that saṅkalpo vā in (a) reminds us of the
context of ĪPK 1.8.9 (icchāto bhartur adhyakṣarūpo) which relates to the
externality of even the creation of imagination: tasmāt sāṅkalpikānāmapi
bahirbhāve paramaśvarecchaiva hetuḥ — ĪPV I: 421. Likewise in (b) and
(c) the word kalpa mirrors yathā in the same kārikā. Also see Rastogi
2013a: section on mānasa pratyakṣa, 103-06.

206 Pandey 1950: 151, 154-62.

207 Cf. mano ’nuvyavasāyi sat । — ĪPK 2.2.3b; also see Rastogi 2012:
379.

208 tasya hr̥dayasaṁvādatāratamyāpekṣayā śrotr̥pratipattr̥sphuraṇaṁ
sphuṭāsphuṭatvenātivicitram । tatra ye svabhāvato nirmalamukurahr̥dayāḥ
[. . .] teṣāṁ [. . .] rasasañcayo nāṭyalakṣaṇaḥ sphuṭa eva । ye tv
atathābhūtās teṣāṁ pratyakṣ-ocitatathāvidhacarvaṇālābhāya naṭādiprakriyā
। — ABh I: 291

209 tatra ca naṭo dhyāyinām iva idaṁ dhyānapadam । na hi tatrāyam eva
sindūrādimayo vāsudevaḥ smaraṇīya iti pratipattiḥ । api tu
tadupāyadvāreṇa atisphuṭībhūtasaṅkalpagocaro devatā-viśeṣo dhyāyināṁ
phalakr̥t । tadvan naṭaprakriyādvāroditā-tisphuṭādhyavasāyaviṣayīkr̥to
niyatadeśakālādyaspr̥ṣṭo ‘ata idaṁ phalam’ iti vidhisthānīyo ’rtho
vyutpattiṁ vitarati । — ABh I: 286; also see Pandey 1935: 167-70.

210 Pandey 1935: 140-44.

211 vibhāvānubhāvavyabhicārisaṁyogād rasaniṣpattiḥ । — NŚ 6.31; also see
Pandey 1935: 10, 24, 31.

212 ko dr̥ṣṭāntaḥ । atrāha [. . .] yathā hi guḍādibhir dravyair
vyañjanair oṣadhibhiś ca ṣāḍavādayo rasā nirvartyante tathā
nānābhāvopagatā api sthāyino rasatvam āpnuvanti । — ABh I: 284-88;
ādayaḥ in ṣāḍavādayo implies reference to pānaka (a juice or drink
literally named “drink”), etc. as well. Cf. ABh. I: 285: pānakarasāsvādo
’pi kiṁ guḍamarīcādiṣu dr̥ṣṭa iti samānam etat.

213 pr̥thagdīpaprakāśānāṁ srotasāṁ sāgare yathā । avirud-dhāvabhāsānām
ekakāryā tathaikyadhīḥ ।। — ĪPK 2.3.7; — Vr̥tti: bhinnāḥ pradīpaprabhāḥ
avibhāgena bhāsante, nadīpravāhāś ca sindhubuddhau, pānake ca te te
rasāḥ, [. . .] parasparānupraveśakṣamāḥ [. . .]
tattadekakāryaikadravyābhāsena kalpante pratyakṣe eva । tad etat
sāmānādhikaraṇyam । [Just as the idea of unity of distinct rays of a
lamp and of currents in the sea is produced by their appearing as single
entity(ies), so does that of the manifestations which are not
incompatible with one another. — tr. Torella/Pandey with modification];
— [The individual rays of light in a torch appear as an undifferentiated
whole and the same hold for the currents of rivers in the notion of the
sea and for the various flavours in the pānaka [. . .], capable as they
are of interpenetrating, lend themselves to the manifestation, in the
direct experience itself, of the various unitary things having a single
unitary effect (tattadekakāryaikadravya°) — tr. Torella.]

214 sāmānādhikaraṇyābhāsavaśād vastu । anekasyaikatā hi
sāmānādhikaraṇyam । — Vr̥tti on 2.3.6

215 aikyabuddhis tadupalakṣitaś ca ekavimarśaḥ, ekā ca arthakriyā ।

— ĪPVV III: 117

216 Glossing ekakāryā aikyadhīḥ, Abhinavagupta says: ekena
svalakṣaṇātmanā melanena kāryā aikyadhīr vyākhyātarūpā iti sūtrārthaḥ ।
— ibid.: 117

217 yat tu uktaṁ niyamanidānam ityādi, tatra ucyate — yeṣām eva
avirodhaḥ teṣām eva miśratā । — ibid.: 116

218 nanu ekavicitracamatkārātmakārthakriyābh[read ā’bh]āve ’pi
pānakabuddhir dr̥ṣṭā । netyāha “avyutpanna” iti । — ĪPVV III: 117.
Perhaps this is the portion Pandey has in mind when he refers to
Abhinavagupta’s discussing camatkāra under this kārikā. Cf. Pandey 1935:
92. Pandey numbers this kārikā as 2.3.8, which seems to be a
typographical error.

219 See n 213 above.

220 Luckily this portion is available with excellent translation and
notes by Torella. I reproduce below the relevant extract from the
Vivr̥ti: sāmānyāny eva hi prabhūtāni saṁbhūya anyonyāvacchedena
vyavasthitāni sphuṭatābhāsatām āsādya deśādisāmānyābhāsāvacchedena
svalakṣaṇatāṁ bhajante । [. . .] svayam adeśakālabhedatve ’pi parasparaṁ
bhedaḥ parasparaṁ paryāyāvacchedaś ca sāmānyānām
anekasvalakṣaṇatāpattihetuḥ teṣāṁ cānuguṇyenaiva avacchedo bhavati [. .
.] । — cf. Torella 2007b: 547. The underlined words are those that are
cited and explained by the ĪPVV.

221 “saṁbhūya” iti parasparaṁ saṁmiśrībhūya । na ca dvandvapadār- thena
tulyakakṣyatā, api tu parasparaṁ viśeṣaṇaviśeṣyabhāvena paryāyato
guṇapradhānabhāveneti yāvat । — ĪPVV II: 26

222 tayor api ca deśākālābhāsayos tadavacchedāt (i.e. bhāvā- vacchedāt)
saṁkoca iti ṣaḍrasasaṁpādyamāne pānake yathā anyonyaśaktiniyantraṇayā
apūrvaṣāḍavādirasodayaḥ, tathā ihāpi svalakṣaṇābhāsodaya iti ca
yaugapadyena api anyonyāvacchedakārī upakārī rase ca yathā
kuśalasūdavyāpāraḥ pradhānatayā upayogī, tathā svalakṣaṇodaye
bhagavanniyatiśaktir yā sarvaṁ niyacchati । — ibid.: 27

223 “tathā śauklyena” dārṣṭāntikatā tathāśabdena sūcitā [. . .] “tataś
ca” iti arthakriyāviśeṣasaṁbhavāt । “anyadā” iti [. . .] । “tathāpi” iti
na samakakṣyatayā pratipattiḥ, api tu guṇapradhānabhāvena । [. . .] atra
dr̥ṣṭāntaḥ “yathā” iti । ananubhūyamāno ’neko rasaḥ [. . .] na tasya
pramātuḥ pānakarasaḥ pratipanno bhavati । nanu pratyakṣe ’pi yadi ekam
anekaṁ ca bhāti tarhi “taddvayālambanā etā mano ’nuvyavasāyi” (2.2.3)
iti katham uktam ityāśaṅkāṁ nikr̥ntati “kevalam” iti । yena pramātrā
maricaguḍādi na āsvāditaṁ kadācit, pānakam eva tu āsvādyate iti, tasya
sa bhinno raso vikalpena vyavahāryatāṁ na netuṁ śakyaḥ pratyakṣāvabhāto
’pi, aparasya śakyas tata ucyate [. . .] ekābhāsatā tu kutaḥ । āha
“ekābhāsaś ca” [. . .] na kevalam anubhavavimarśabalāt, kāryabalād api
ekābhāsa ity āha “arthakriyābhedaḥ” iti । “teṣām” iti vivekinām । [. .
.] nanu maricādīnāṁ guḍādidravyāntarasaṁparkāt rasāntaram eva udeṣyati
rūpāntaram iva tāmbūlīdale cūrṇakasitakhadirāṇām । naitad iha samam iti
darśayati “tadāvirbhāve vā” iti । [. . .] sāmānādhikaraṇye tu na ayaṁ
dr̥ṣṭāntaḥ । kva tarhi । āha “ekatāpatter upapattau” iti । nanu na
dr̥ṣṭāntamātrāt vastusiddhiḥ । [. . .] dr̥ṣṭāntena tarhi kim । āha
“maricādīnām” ityādi । [. . .] parasya asaṁbhāvanāṁ nirākartuṁ dr̥ṣṭānto
’yaṁ saty api hetau “nanu” iti । etadeva ghaṭayati “nahi” iti ।
maricaguḍadadhnāṁ na dharmadharmibhāvena guḍa eva dadhi maricam eva guḍa
iti vā na prakhyā, na upākhyā pānakabhūmau, gaṅgāyamunāvitastādīnāṁ
sāgare । — ĪPVV III: 118-20 containing excerpts from the Vivr̥ti.

224 pākarūpayā samyagyojanayā (tāvad alaukiko raso jāyate) । — ABh I:
288; pākakrameṇa samyagyojanārūpāt kuśalasaṁpādyāt saṁyogāt — ibid.;
also see Pandey 1935: 22

225 vibhāvādināmadheyavyapadeśyaiḥ [. . .] sāmājikadhiyi samyagyogaṁ
saṁbandham aikāgryaṁ vā āsāditavadbhir alau-
kikanirvighnasaṁvedanātmakacarvaṇāgocaratāṁ nīto ’rthaḥ [. . .]
sthāyivilakṣaṇa eva rasaḥ ABh I: 284. Abhinavagupta’s above-noted
explanation of saṁyoga is a bit intriguing. Gnoli takes all the three,
saṁyagyoga (perfect combination), saṁbandha (relation) and aikāgrya
(conspiration) together (Gnoli 1968: 78). I however beg to differ from
him, the reason being that with the use of vā, Abhinavagupta makes all
the senses optional or alternable. I have one more difference. I take
saṁyagyoga as a semantic analysis of saṁyoga — the adjective samyak
qualifying yoga, whereas saṁbandha (relation) and aikāgrya
(one-pointedness) as the alternative or optional meaning/explanation of
yoga.

226 kintv alaukikavibhāvādisaṁyogabalopanataiveyaṁ carvaṇā । — ABh I:
285; tena vibhāvādisaṁyogād rasanā yato niṣpadyate atas
tathāvidharasanāgocaro lokottaro ’rtho rasa iti — ibid.

227 alaukika evāyaṁ carvaṇopayogī vibhāvādivyavahāraḥ । kvānyatretthaṁ
dr̥ṣṭam iti ced bhūṣaṇam etad asmākam alaukikatvasiddhau ।
pānakarasāsvādo ’pi kiṁ guḍamarīcādiṣu iti samānam etat । — ABh I: 285;
upāyādīnāṁ vibhāvādīnāṁ laukikavailakṣaṇyāt । — ibid.

228 ABh I: 280-84. See Pandey 1950: 166-69; Gnoli 1968: 62-78 for
detailed treatment and translation.

229 vikasitasvabhāva eva bhāvo vikalpena vyavahriyate । — ĪPVV II:
26-27.

230 [. . .] sāmānyātmakam arthaṁ prakāśayaty eva smr̥tivyatiriktam
vikalpamātram । — ibid.: 19

231 tata eva na parimitam eva sādhāraṇyam, api tu vitatam । [. . .]
bhayakampayor eva vā tad atra sākṣātkārāyamāṇatve paripoṣikā
naṭādisāmagrī । yasyāṁ vastusatāṁ kāvyārpitānāṁ ca deśakālapramātrādīnāṁ
niyamehetūnām anyonyapratibandhabalād atyantam apasaraṇe sa eva
sādhāraṇībhāvaḥ sutarāṁ puṣyati । — ABh I: 279

232 Vide pp. 175-76 above.

233 Pandey 1935: 150-51.

234 I will refer the learned reader to the landmark article (pp. 1-2,
20-23) of Gopinath Kaviraj way back in 1923-24 titled “The Doctrine of
Pratibhā in Indian Philosophy” (ABORI, Poona) reprinted in the Aspects
of Indian Thought (pp. 1-43), 1966. Kaviraj specially notes the level of
profoundity shown by the Trika system.

235 “Thus in the Pratyabhijñāhr̥daya (p. 52) Kṣemarajā quotes a verse1
[1yā caiṣā pratibhā tattatpadārthakramarūṣitā । akramānantacidrūpaḥ
pramātā sa maheśvaraḥ ।।] in which pratibhā is identified with the
supreme subject, whose nature is infinite intelligence (anantacidrūpa),
indivisible and void of time-limitation (akrama). It is unalterable and
everywhere One, being the one Light whose reflection shines through
every state of modal consciousness.” — ibid.: 22-23. The kārikā cited by
Kaviraj is ĪPK 1.7.1

236 sarasvatī svādu tadarthavastu niḥṣyandamānā mahatāṁ kavīnām ।
alokasāmānyam abhivyanakti pratisphurantaṁ pratibhāviśeṣam ।। — DhĀ 1.6
[Sarasvatī, (working) within great poets, in pouring forth this sweet
matter (arthavastu) (viz. the emotions and flavors) reveals a special,
vibrant, genius (pratibhā), which is superhuman. — tr. Ingalls, etc.]

237 sarasvatīti vāgrūpā bhagavatītyarthaḥ । [. . .] abhivyanakti
pratisphurantam iti (parisphurantam variant), pratipattṝn prati sā
pratibhā nānumīyamānā, api tu tadāveśena bhāsamānā ity arthaḥ । yad
uktam asmadupādhyāyabhaṭṭatautena – ‘nāyakasya kaveḥ śrotuḥ samāno
’nubhavas tataḥ’ iti । pratibhā apūrvavastunirmāṇakṣamā prajñā । tasyā
viśeṣo rasāveśavaiśadyasaundaryakāvyanirmāṇakṣamatvam । [. . .] yeneti ।
abhivyaktena sphuratā pratibhāviśeṣeṇa nimittena mahākavitvagaṇaneti
yāvat । — DhĀL: 23-24

238 prajñā navanavonmeṣaśālinī pratibhā matā । tadanuprāṇanā
jīvadvarṇanānipuṇaḥ kaviḥ ।।

239 Abhinavagupta refers to Bharata’s NŚ 7.2: kaver antargataṁ bhāvaṁ
(bhāvayan bhāva ucyate) — bhāva is so called because it makes the inner
mental state of the poet known to the reader.

240 pratibhābhidhānaparavāgdevatā । — ABh I: 4.

241 (kaver yaḥ) pratibhātmā prathamaḥ parispandaḥ । — ibid. II: 296

242 [. . .] pratibhānāparaparyāyā sākṣātkārasvabhāvā । — ibid. I: 280

243 “niścalaiva” iti nirodhecchayā cālyamānā api avicalā । “prati-
bhāsaṁjñā” iti pratibhānalakṣaṇā iyaṁ śabdabhāvanākhya āgama eveti yāvat
। — ĪPVV III: 93. See for further discussion Rastogi, 2013a: sub-section
“śabdana-/Pratibhāna-Lakṣaṇa āgama” (pp. 174-80).

244 “sabījā api” iti bījam api vilīnaṁ pārameśvarasvātantryaśaktiśeṣatām
eti iti bījāvaśeṣā viśve bhāvā rudrabhūmau yogyatādiśabdābhidheyā iti
saṁbandhaḥ । [. . .] satyam, bhedarūpatve yā yogyatā sā vilīnā
bhedābhedarūpatvena parāparatayā, tayā tu yā īśvarasaṁvidi prathā
sphuṭā, tasyā avaśyaṁ sa eva bījabhāvo yat bhagavataḥ svātantryam iti
viśiṣṭaiva iyaṁ yogyatā । — ĪPVV III: 376

245 etadupasaṁhāreṇa spaṣṭayati “tad evam” iti । idantāvamarśa eva yadi
tatra sphuṭaḥ syāt, tadā viśvam eva tat bhavet na tu viśvabījam iti
ucitapadam । bīja-saṁskāra-yogyatā-śaktirūpaṁ ca asmadādīnāṁ
nityānumeyam api sarvajñapade ca sphuṭaprakāśanocitam eva iti ahantāyāṁ
viśrāmyati, na ca asau śuddhaiva ahantā viśvabījatāyāḥ parisphuraṇād
anabhivyaktatadrūpacakravarti-paṇḍita-kavi-śilpipra-bhr̥tigatasvasvakaraṇīyaviśeṣasphuraṇavat
। ata eva śaktivācoyuktyā atra vyavahāraḥ । — ĪPVV III: 377.

246 tatra ekena āśrayasya svarūpamātreṇa abhidhānam । — ĪPVV II: 338.

247 yad uktaṁ sarvasya jīvato jñānakriye siddhe iti tat katham [. . .]
svadarśanānusāreṇa tam ekam āśrayam upapādayiṣyan svarūpatas tāvad
upakṣipati । — ibid.: 339.

248 tata eva bhaṭṭacandrānandena “paśyato rūpam ālekhād bhāto
bhānānuṣaṅgi yat । pratīpabhānaṁ pratibhā bhāvānām” iti bhāvadharmatvena
abhidhāya api “ātmasaṁśrayā” iti saṁvidviśrāntataiva uktā । — ibid.

249 na kevalaṁ ca saṁbandhamayaikatāsparśiparimitamāyāpramā-
tr̥paryavasāyī vastuprakāśanavyāpāro yāvad
anantacinmaya-śivatābhāsaviśrāntaiva pratikṣaṇaṁ vastusaṁvitkriyā । na
ca saṁvidaḥ kramo ’sti ekaiva ekatraiva kṣaṇe arthaprakāśatā
saṁbandhaśivatāmayam eva svarūpam āviṣkaroti ity ucyate । tathā
cācāryadharmakīrtiḥ “bahirmukhaṁ ca tajjñānaṁ bhāty arthapratibhāsavat ।
buddheś ca grāhikā buddhir nityam antarmukhātmani ।” (Pramāṇavārttika
2.428) iti antarmukhā iti, ātmani iti ca svasaṁvedanam arthābhāsaśūnyam
apr̥thagbhūtaṁ coktam । tathā pratyabhijñāyām uktam “yā caiṣā pratibhā
tattatpadārthakramarūṣitā । akramānantacidrūpaḥ pramātā sa maheśvaraḥ
।।” (ĪPK 1.7.1) ity etat tatraiva vitatya pradarśitam । —
Saṁbandha-Siddhi, p. 9.

From n 248 and the citation from Pramāṇavārttika as above it is evident
that Utpala’s formulation of pratibhā was impacted by Bhaṭṭa Candrānanda
and Dharmakīrti, but this is beyond our immediate purview.

250 tattatpadārthakramarūṣitā.

251 [. . .] atyarthabhinnārthāvabhāsakhacite vibhau.

252 yā caiṣā pratibhā tattatpadārthakramarūṣitā । akramānantacidrūpaḥ
pramātā sa maheśvaraḥ ।। [And that (which is this) inner manifestive
awareness (pratibhā) inlaid with (rūṣitā) succession of myriad objects
is the knowing subject — free from succession, delimitation and having
consciousness as (his) nature — Maheśvara.] This kārikā is open to
different renderings depending upon what one follows, e.g. Kārikā, Vr̥tti
or Vivr̥ti. For now, it is following Kārikā as I have been able to
understand it.

253 yā eṣā pratibhā sa pramātā maheśvaraḥ ।

254 eṣā pratibhā pramātā maheśvaraś ca ।

255 yā pratibhā eṣā sa maheśvaraḥ pramātā ।

256 (yā) pramātā maheśvaraḥ sā pratibhā ।

257 antarlīnārthābhāsa abstracted from “antarlīnatadarthābhāsasya
atad-vyapohanena” (Vr̥tti on 1.6.3) and supported by Abhinavagupta’s
antaḥsarvārthāvabhāsaḥ (ĪPV on 1.6.3).

258 Vide pramātur eva svatantrasya antarlīnatadatadarthābhāsasya
atadapohanena [. . .] । — ĪPVr̥ 1.6.3.

259 “yā pratibhā eṣā” iti sarvasya sadaiva svaprakāśā vastutaś ca
antarmukhena vapuṣā । — ĪPVV II: 339; “pratibhā” [. . .] iti
antarmukhena vapuṣā āśrayaḥ siddha eva । — ibid.: 340; yat kiñcid
avabhāsate, tasya antarmukhaṁ yad avabhāsanam । — ibid.

260 evaṁ smr̥tau vikalpe vāpy apohanaparāyaṇe । jñāne vāpy antarābhāsaḥ
sthita eveti niścitam ।। [Therefore it is ascertained that whether in
memory or in vikalpa — that depends on exclusion — or in direct
perception, the manifestation of the object is definitely internal.” —
tr. Torella with slight modification.]

261 sarvasaṁvitsu sarvārthāvabhāsaḥ pramātr̥saṁlīnaś cittattvavad
ānurūpyeṇa prakāśamānaḥ sadā sthita eva । [In every kind of cognitions
(sarvasaṁvitsu), all objective manifestation is always definitely (eva)
shining in the cognizer (pramātr̥saṁlīnaḥ) like the consciousness
principle, in an appropriate way (ānurūpyeṇa). — tr. Torella, again with
the same slight alteration.]

262 Cf. n 249 above.

263 See ĪPV on 1.6.3 and Torella 1994, n 8, p. 131.

264 sūtrārtham avatārayati “yāvac ca” iti । [. . .] yat kiñcid ābhāsate,
tasya antarmukhaṁ yad avabhāsanaṁ, sa ātmā pramātā, sa eva ca svabhāvaḥ,
tad eva ca aiśvaryam iti saṁbandhaḥ । — ĪPVV II: 240.

265 It is to be noted that in the kārikā the compound
tattatpadārtha-kramarūṣitā refers to pratibhā, whereas the compound
akramānan-tacidrūpaḥ to pramātā and then by extension to maheśvaraḥ.

266 “vr̥ttau tu” iti phalanirūpaṇaṁ vr̥ttau kr̥tam iti na yacchabdo
vidhāsyamānadharmādhāratādyotako ’nuvādakatvena upāttaḥ nāpi
dharmādhāratābhisandhānapātrīkr̥tapūrvarūpaniṣṭha-
vivakṣitadharmāntarādhāratādyotako vidhāyakatvena tacchabdaḥ । na ca
sarvathā sautro vidhyanuvādau spaṣṭau ity āha “evakāreṇa” iti । — ĪPVV
II: 341.

267 “ābhāsa eva ātmā” iti vr̥ttigranthaṁ saṁgamayati āśaṅkāṁ śamayan
“yady api” ityādinā । nanu antarmukhatvāt yasya na kālayogaḥ, sa kathaṁ
‘sarvasaṁvitkālavyāpī’ iti uktaḥ । atra āha “atha ca” iti । ‘uktam’ iti
vr̥ttau sūtre ca । nanu yadi sa eva itthaṁ sphurati tacchaktivikāso
viśvam iti, tarhi alaṁ tatpratyabhijñām upadiśya । atra āha “kevalam”
iti । evaṁbhūtaṁ yad arthānāṁ krameṇa “kintu naisargikaḥ (1.6.9)”
ityādisūtradvayadr̥ṣṭyā avabhāsanaṁ, tasyeti samastaṁ padam । — ĪPVV II:
341. I take tasyeti samastaṁ padam as referring to
tattatpadārthakramācchuritaḥ in the Vr̥tti.

268 ābhāsanakriyā ca yāvad apūrvā naisargikī vyavadhānavandhyā
tātkālikatāliṅgitasphuṭabhāvā vartate, tāvadābhāso ’pi sphuṭo ’bhinava
eva । — ibid.: 333.

269 prakāśarūpatayā sarvasya sadaiva svayam eva paramārthasattve
kasyacit nirmāṇam ity avakāśābhāvāt, ābhāsakriyāmukhena tu apūrvatvam ।
— ibid.: 333-34.

270 Until now the Kārikā and Vr̥tti were taking the whole compound
beginning with akramā° as referring to pramātā.

271 Vide ĪPV I: 352-353.

272 In the Kārikā akramā° qualifies pramātā which is identical with
maheśvaraḥ.

273 In the Vr̥tti akramā°qualifies pramātā which is called ātmā
enumerated separately from maheśvaraḥ. Pratibhā is identified with
maheśvaraḥ for reasons not enumerated in the Kārikā.

274 “yā pratibhā eṣā” iti [. . .] “akramā sa” (eva bhagavān)
“anantacidrūpāḥ” [. . .] “maheśvaraḥ pramātā” । — ĪPVV II: 339-40.

275 sā ca “pratibhā” anapahnavanīyā iti antarmukhena vapuṣā āśrayaḥ
siddha eva । — ibid.: 340

276 Vide ĪPV I: 353-54.

277 Owing to our extremely limited access to the Vivr̥ti there is always
an element of tentativeness in our conclusions.

278 na ca tāvatmātrataiva vidhīyate yena seti bhavet, kintu “pramātā
maheśvaraḥ sā pratibhā” iti pramātr̥tvamāheśvaryābhyām upacitā
labdhaparipoṣā, tata eva upacayabalād eva ucitaḥ puṁstvanirdeśaḥ । —
ĪPVV II: 341

279 The current thematicization takes us back to the original notion of
reality as the synthesis of bodha (awareness) and kartr̥tā (agency).
Pramātr̥tva and māheśvarya would thus represent knowledge and agency
respectively both in their absolute agential mode.

280 prativastu samastajīvataḥ pratibhāsi pratibhāmayo yathā । — ŚSĀ
18.11ab

281 bhavadīyagabhīrabhāṣiteṣu pratibhā samyag udetu me puro ’grataḥ ।
tadanuṣṭhitaśaktir apy atas tadbhavadarcāvyasanaṁ ca nirvirāmam ।।
vyavahārapade ’pi sarvadā pratibhātv arthakalāpa eṣa mām । bhavato
’vayavo yathā na tu svata evādaraṇīyatāṁ gataḥ ।। — ŚSĀ12.23-24 [Let
insight into your profound sayings thoroughly arise in me in the first
instance. Having developed strength by practising on it, let your
worship become perpetual habit with me: “even in the realm of worldly
transactions let this mass of objects always shine to me as thy limb,
and not that it evokes regard for its own sake.] (See also n 47 above.)

282 Kṣemarāja explains pratibhā as navanavollekhinī prajñā (Vivr̥ti on
ŚSĀ 12.23, p. 185).

283 Reminds Vr̥tti-formulation: svāṅgabhūte prameye nirmātr̥tayā
maheśvaraś ca । — ĪP-Vr̥tti on 1.7.1

284 adhikāriṇi śāstrārthasya bimbapratibimbavat saṁkrāntiḥ,
loḍliṅgādīnāṁ viṣayībhavati prathamapuruṣārtha uttamapuruṣārthe
paryavasyati, na tu tāṭasthyena, adhikāryanadhikāriṇoḥ pratipattau
viśeṣābhāvaprasaṅgāt । ārogyakāmāḥ śivāṁ sevantāṁ sevadhvam — iti vā
vākyārthasya sevāmahai — ity evaṁrūpeṇa adhikāriṇi dvitīyā kakṣyā
saṁkrāntau, tr̥tīyakakṣyām eva bhāvikoṭipatitām api puruṣārthasaṁpattim
akālakalitasvarūpānupraveśena svātmīkr̥tām abhimanyamāne, tata eva
vitatasaṁvitsundaraparāmarśe pūrṇatā- bhimānapratilambhāt । — ĪPV I:
45-46.

285 Vide pp. 99-100.

286 gītaṁ nr̥ttaṁ ca vādyaṁ ca trayaṁ saṅgītam ucyate । — quoted from an
unspecified source in Raghavan 1981: 123.

287 ŚSĀ 18.18 (gītīkā), 14.10 (nr̥tta), 14.14 (gīyamāna), 20.2 (nr̥tta).

288 TĀ 3: 208-47; also Pandey 1959: 562-64.

289 With the welcome exception of Anupa Pande who translated 28th
chapter of the Nāṭyaśāstra and Abhinavagupta’s commentary thereon. See
Bibliography.

290 sādhāraṇam idānīṁ vyākhyāsyāmaḥ । tatra sādhāraṇaṁ nāma
antarasvaratā [. . .] tatra dve sādhāraṇe jātisādhāraṇaṁ svarasādhāraṇaṁ
ca । [. . .] svarasādhāraṇaṁ (emend sādhāraṇā) dvividham । — NŚ, prose
text pre-28.34 and 28.35-36

291 tasmād ittham etad ity asmatparamagurava utpalapādā manyante iha
tāvat tisro dve catasra ityādinā svasthānasvarūpam uktaṁ taccarāt [. .
.] [. . .] [. . .] tvāt pāramārthikaṁ prākr̥tarūpam ucyate । — ABh on
IV.33. [Therefore, this is the way in which my grand-teacher
Utpala-devapāda thinks. Now, here, three, two, four, this is the order
in which the nature of characterstic position has been mentioned . . .
(missing) . . . The ultimate natural form has been mentioned.” — tr.
Pande 1997: 74 with slight modification).]

292 Pande 1997: 148, n 117.

293 tās tv anauḍuvitā nityaṁ kartavyā hi svarāśrayāḥ । sarvasvarāṇāṁ
nāśas tu vihitas tv atha jātiṣu ।। na madhyamasya nāśas tu kartavyo hi
kadācana । sarvasvarāṇāṁ pravaro hy anāśī madhyamaḥ smr̥taḥ ।
gāndharvakalpe vihitaḥ sāmasv api ca madhyamaḥ ।। — NŚ 28.64-65; also
cf. Pande 1997: 86

294 Vide ABh IV.42 on NŚ 28.64; also see Pande 1997: 86, 154, n 145.

295 śrīmadutpaladevās tv āhuḥ । jātilakṣaṇe vakṣyamāṇe madhyamasya lopo
na kaścid vakṣyate । tanmadhyamasya nāśo na kartavya iti kiṁ
pratiṣedhena । prāpter abhāvāt । sarvasvarāṇāṁ nāśa ity anenāpi na
kiñcit kr̥tam । niyamasvaralopasya yathāsvaṁ jātiṣu vakṣyamāṇatvāt ।
tasmād ayam atra bhāvaḥ । yathā vaicitryārtharāgayor grāmarāgatvaṁ
nīyante tadā ṣaḍ api svarāḥ ṣāḍavauḍuvitavidhinā sarvāsu jātiṣu
svabuddhyā grāmavibhāge kramāl lopyāḥ । na tu madhyamaḥ kadācana ity
atra grāmarāgavaicitryam anena sūcitam । — ABh IV: 42-43 [Utpaladeva
says that, when the characterstics of jāti are to be mentioned, madhyama
is nowhere said to be dropped. Since madhyama is not to be dropped,
where is the point in negating it since the positive formulation (that
ma can be dropped, this) does not exist, if it is said that all notes
are dispensable, this is a general formula (applying to madhyama also by
implication). Even that has no relevance, because, in the jātis, the
dropping of notes is according to fixed rules. Hence the idea is that
when the rāgas are performed as grāma-rāgas, then for the sake of
variety all the six notes can be dropped by the technique of ṣāḍava and
auḍava in the different jātis (from which arise the grāma-rāgas),
according to grāma division and according to one’s intelligence. But
madhyama is never to be dropped. — tr. Pande 1997: 87.]

Mukund Lath (1978: 101, n 1) translates the portion from
śrīmadutpaladevās tv āhuḥ to vakṣyamāṇatvāt as under: “In laying down
the characterstics of jātis, nowhere has it been stated that madhyama
may be dropped in any of them. To what purpose, then, an especial
prohibition here ruling that madhyama should never be dropped, since the
possibility of (its being dropped) does not at all obtain (prāpter
abhāvāt)? Neither is it necessary here to enumerate all indispensable
notes, for this, too, serves no purpose because in describing the jātis
each note which is enjoined as dispensable is in any case laid down
separately for individual jātis.”

296 Lath 1978: 101.

297 Op. cit.: 185, n 2.

298 Raghavan 1981: 122. Raghavan is quoting from Mad. MS (chap. 29,
Jātyādhyāya, vol. IV: 21, corresponding to the GOS IV: 86-87). I am
however referring to the 2nd edition of the GOS where the text has been
further critically re-edited as under: anye tv āhuḥ । svarā ity
alaṁkāraikadeśāḥ prayojyā ye ’nujñātāḥ । śrīmadutpaladevās tathā
manyante । — NŚ IV: 86.

299 te dhruvāṇāṁ prayogeṣu na kāryāḥ svapramāṇataḥ । taddhruṇāṁ prayoge
tu (’pi) kāryā hy ārohiṇaḥ svarāḥ ।। — NŚ 29.28

300 śrīmadutpaladevās tathā manyante । ārohiṇaḥ svarā ity
anenātiprakarṣiṇaḥ svarūpam uktam । pratyakṣaram āroho vidyate yeṣāṁ
svarāṇāṁ te ārohiṇaḥ । tena pratisvaram akṣaraṁ pratyakṣaraṁ svaram ity
evaṁrūpam atikarṣaṇam । — ABh on IV: 86.

301 Pandey 1959: 539. He refers to ABh (MS), XXIX.41. Perhaps this is
the portion he has in mind while referring to Utpala’s name in ABh under
NŚ (MS) 26.39, 41 in Pandey 1963: 927 (Appendix B). In printed edition
it is found under NŚ 29.30 (not under 29.39 or 29.41).

302 Raghavan 1981: 122. He refers to Mad. MS IV: 22; GOS IV: 87.

303 paramaguruśrīmadutpaladevapādā manyante । varṇānāṁ padanibandhanatve
tadāśritālaṅkārā gītaprayogarahitakevala-svarālāpamātragāmina iti
(śaṅkāpadānam eva । tatrālaṅkāratā-pratibhāsas tatsaṁskārajo na mukhyaḥ)
। — ABh IV: 84. There are some minor variations in the text of Pandey
and Raghavan.

304 yathākṣaro ’tha dvikalas tathā caiva catuṣkalaḥ । (evam ekakalo
jñeyaḥ śuddhaś caccatpuṭā (emend puṭaḥ) budhai (dikaḥ) । trayo bhedā hi
tālasya dviguṇād dviguṇāḥ smr̥tāḥ ।।

305 In the 4th GOS edition it is cañcatpuṭaḥ. I have followed Lath and
Anupa Pande. Kailash Chandradeva Brihaspati adopts cañcatpuṭaḥ (1991:
237).

306 Vide Lath 1978: 323; also Pande 1997: 163, n 170. Anupa mistakenly
reads yonivādya for yonidvaya.

307 Lath 1978: 318, 322-26, 330-31, 336-38. The entire presentation on
NŚ 31.26 as above is a thoroughly abridged reproduction from Lath, so
far as I could grasp. Also see Brihaspati 1991: 236-42.

308 Pande 1997: 163-64.

309 It is only the linguistic interpretation of the printed text. I am
not at all sure if I am technically correct. I have also no idea if
asaṁbhava is a technical concept. The relevant text from ABh (on
IV.163-64) is reproduced below: ayaṁ tāvad vākyārthaḥ । yatra yā (tā)vad
anyaprakāro nāsti vilambaṁ śīghram iti hi tattadvyavahāro loke । na ca
madhyāpekṣaḥ । tatra śīghratādrutatvānugrāhakatenāpekṣyai- (tāpekṣa
e)kakalaḥ । madhyāpekṣo dvikalaḥ । vilambitāpekṣaś catuṣkalaḥ । na cāsya
layarūpasya mārgatrayātmakatvam enava (?) । na hi laye
tūttarottaradvaiguṇyam । tribhāgādhikatvam asya tatra darśitatvāt ।
mārgabhede tu dvaiguṇyam eva kevalam । [. . .] tatra kecid āhuḥ ।
dviguṇās tu guṇāḥ (smr̥tā i) ti । [. . .] । tatra hi prathamaprakāras
tāvad dviguṇaḥ । anyau kramadviguṇau evaṁ sati sarve guṇa(ṇā) dviguṇā
ity upakramaḥ । utpaladevapāda(dā)stvasmatparamaguravo vyācakṣate ।
tālasya yasmāt trayo bhedās triguṇā iti triguṇaparasparalakṣaṇadharmāṇas
tasmāt trayaḥ smr̥tāḥ । dviguṇatve hetur dviguṇā i(di)ti । yathākṣarasya
vyākhyā guṇaguṇanīyatvād dvikalatvam । tasyāpi dvābhyāṁ guṇyamānatvāc
catuṣkalatvam । catuṣkalatvād bhedābhāvāc ca nāsya punar guṇyamānatvam
astīti । vayaṁ tu manmahe । vīṇāyām api yathākṣare
dvaiguṇyasyāsambhavābhāvaḥ । asambhavasyāpekṣitatvād dvaiguṇyasyeti । —
ABh IV: 163-64.

310 Pandey 1959: 539 (from MS, xxxii, 4-6).

311 Raghavan 1981: 122-23 (from Mad. MS IV: 188 and GOS IV.291).

312 dhruvāsaṁjñāni yāni syur nāradapramukhair dvijaiḥ ।

gītāṅgāni tu(nīha) sarvāṇi viniyuktāny anekaśaḥ ।। — NŚ 32.1

313 yā r̥caḥ pāṇikā gāthāḥ saptarūpāṅga eva ca ।

saptarūpapramāṇaṁ hi taddhruvetyabhisaṁjñitam ।।

ebhyas tv aṅgānyathoddhr̥tya nānācchandaḥkr̥tāni tu ।

dhruvātvaṁ yāni gacchanti tāni vakṣyāmy ahaṁ punaḥ ।। — NŚ 32.2-3.

314 etaduktaṁ bhavati । yathā [. . .] tathā gītāṅgādīni adr̥ṣṭapradhāne
gītakādirūpasaṁghātotthitāni kutaścid rasabhāvakr̥tāny
aucityasamarpaṇātmakarañjanāyogyalakṣaṇād utkarṣād
ucitagīyamānavr̥ttaviśeṣāśrayeṇa saṁghātātmakarūpaṁ pratipannakāraṇatvaṁ
prāgdaśāyā ananubhūya kāryam auttarakālikaṁ bhajante
kāraṇaśabdavyapadeśyāni ca bhavanti iti । — ABh on NŚ 32.3: IV.290
cited, translated and explained in Lath 1978: 125.

315 dhruvāṇām aṅgasaṁjñāni pañcānām api nityaśaḥ । — NŚ 4.6; Lath 1978:
126

316 Lath 1978: 119.

317 tad evaṁ pratidhruvaṁ gītāṅgādibhya etadupajīvitam । [. . .] kim iti
ete dharmārthasādhanopāttāḥ । [. . .] dr̥ṣṭaphalatāyām api adr̥ṣṭam iti
cet tat samastānāṁ yugapad vā vikalpane veti sarvam asamañjasaprayāsam ।
tasmād uktadharmopajīvanam eva paramagurunirūpitaṁ yuktam । yathoktaṁ
śrīmadutpaladevapādaiḥ । “sthitāt sthāyitvasampannāt
prastutasthemayojanam । dhruvāsu yad yad anyebhyas tadvat prajñopa(jñaḥ
pra)kalpayet ।।” iti । [. . .] dhruvākārye kāraṇavad dharmānugamāt । —
ABh on NŚ 32.6: IV.291. Pandey has sthita for sthitāt, whereas Pandey
and Raghavan both read prastutasthamayojanam and prajñopakalpayet । (cf.
Pandey 1959: 539; Raghavan 1981: 122-23). Sthema as printed could be
understood in the sense of sthāyitva and hence seems better.

318 sannipātagrahāḥ kāścid vai tarjanīgrahāḥ । tathā ’’kāśagrahāḥ kāścid
dhruvā gāne bhavanti hi ।।

319 For whatever little understanding I could gather I am grateful to my
learned friend Prof. K.D. Tripathi.

320 ataḥ paraṁ pravakṣyāmi bhāṇḍagrahavikalpanam ।। — NŚ 32.412 cd.

321 ABh on NŚ 32.413.

322 sannipātagrahāḥ kāścid iti । dhruvā hastadvayahananajair-akṣarais
tarjanīprahatibhiḥ kr̥te lakṣaṇaśūnyavartanāmātreṇa vā bhāṇḍavādyasya
dhruvānugraha iti tridhā । anye tv āhuḥ — ekakale tāle
sannipātāntyakalāto dvikale catuṣkale ca dhruvāyāstitva tarjanyā iti ।
tadupalakṣitaturyapāde bhāgaprathamakalāntaḥ । ekakalādiniyamābhāve tu
ākāśācchūnyād gīta eva nāmabhāṇḍagraha iti । asmatparamagurubhiś ca
śrīmadutpaladevapādair ayam eva pratipanno ’rthaḥ — ABh on NŚ 32.414:
IV: 393-94.

323 Pandey 1935: 169-70; 1950: 181-82.

6

Some Hitherto Unknown Fragments of Utpaladeva’s Vivr̥ti (I)

On the Buddhist Controversy Over the

Existence of Other Conscious Streams*

Isabelle Ratié

À Raffaele Torella,

sans qui les œuvres d’Utpaladeva

seraient demeurées à maints égards apratyabhijñāta.

Some Old Sources for New Vivr̥ti Fragments

Indology owes to Raffaele Torella one of the most exciting manuscript
discoveries made in the last decades, namely, that of the only extensive
fragment thus far known of Utpaladeva’s Vivr̥ti on his ĪPK. The edition
and translation of this fragmentary codex unicus by its discoverer1 has
had several important consequences. First of all, it has confirmed
Raffaele Torella’s initial hypothesis that the great innovator as
regards the Pratyabhijñā system is not Abhinavagupta but Utpaladeva:2 a
quick comparison between the extant fragment of the Vivr̥ti and the
parallel passages in Abhinavagupta’s ĪPV and ĪPVV shows that at least in
this part of the treatise, Abhinavagupta is extremely faithful to
Utpaladeva’s thought and closely follows his argumentation. But there is
another great advantage to this discovery: we are now able to examine
the marginal annotations contained in the manuscripts of Abhinavagupta’s
ĪPV3 and to check whether some of them contain quotations from the
Vivr̥ti. And this is a task of the utmost importance because, so far,
apart from the fragment discovered by Raffaele Torella, we could only
rely on Abhinavagupta’s commentaries so as to try and reconstruct the
gist of the arguments in the Vivr̥ti.

Admittedly, Abhinavagupta’s ĪPVV in particular constitutes a very rich
source of information regarding Utpaladeva’s detailed commentary on his
own verses: although the ĪPVV most often quotes only one or two words of
the Vivr̥ti while commenting on it, not only does Abhinavagupta expound
on Utpaladeva’s reasonings: he sometimes gives lengthier quotations as
well, although these are not always found where we would expect them to
be. Thus as I have shown elsewhere, the first concluding verse of
Utpaladeva’s Vivr̥ti can be retrieved from Abhinavagupta’s ĪPV ad ĪPK
1.4.3.4

But now that we are in possession of a lengthy fragment of the Vivr̥ti,
we can be certain that we have at our disposal another crucial source of
information on this text besides Abhinavagupta’s commentaries, since a
comparison between the text edited by Raffaele Torella and the
annotations found in the margins of ĪPV manuscripts shows that some of
these annotations are in fact quotations of Utpaladeva’s Vivr̥ti.

This is the case of some of the annotations in manuscript D2, which, as
Raffaele Torella has already noticed, was in all probability one of the
four manuscripts used by the editors of the Kashmir Series of Texts and
Studies (KSTS).5 But D2 is not an exception: Yohei Kawajiri has been
studying a Devanāgarī manuscript of the ĪPV preserved in Lucknow that
also contains such passages in its margins,6 and among the manuscripts
that I have been able to consult, it is also the case of the ĪPV
manuscript preserved in the School of Oriental and African Studies
library (SOAS), and to a greater extent, of one of the manuscripts
preserved in the Srinagar Oriental Research Library (S3). Thus D2, SOAS
and S3 share at least two quotations belonging to the part of the Vivr̥ti
edited by Raffaele Torella (and appearing as well in footnotes of the
Kashmir Text and Studies edition of the ĪPV).7 I could not find in S3 a
number of quotations that are present in the margins of both D2 and
SOAS,8 while S3 gives quotations (sometimes significantly lengthier than
those found in D2 and SOAS) that are not found in the first two
manuscripts,9 which seems to indicate that if D2 and SOAS are very
probably related, the annotations in S3 might have an independent
origin.

Now, since we are sure that these manuscripts bear quotations of the
text found in the incomplete manuscript of the Vivr̥ti discovered by
Raffaele Torella, we may quite safely surmise that they also contain
quotations of hitherto unknown parts of the Vivr̥ti. I think that it is
undoubtedly the case of S3. Of course, for now – that is, as long as no
complete manuscript of the Vivr̥ti is discovered –, we cannot always be
absolutely sure that the passages quoted do belong to Utpaladeva’s lost
text: the author of the marginal annotations in S3 sometimes specifies
that he is indeed quoting the Vivr̥ti,10 but alas he does not do so
systematically. However, here Abhinavagupta’s commentary is once more an
extremely precious source: while commenting on Utpaladeva’s lost text,
he regularly quotes some of its words, so that the probability for the
marginal annotations to be taken from the Vivr̥ti is high enough to
confine to certainty if the words quoted in the ĪPVV appear in the
marginal annotations in the same sequence as that found in
Abhinavagupta’s commentary. This means that we now have at our disposal
a mine (or rather several mines) of fragments of Utpaladeva’s lost work,
and that thanks to Raffaele Torella’s pioneering works, we may be able
to retrieve many passages of the Vivr̥ti even if no complete manuscript
of the text comes to light in the near future. The following pages,
which present the first results of an ongoing investigation of the
marginal annotations found in S3,11 offer an edition and translation of
a passage of the Vivr̥ti quoted in the margins of S3 and devoted to the
explanation of ĪPK 1.5.4-5. Both the edition and the translation are
tentative and I still have many doubts as to the meaning (or adequate
reading) of a number of passages. Nonetheless it seems to me that given
the present extent of our knowledge regarding the Vivr̥ti, an imperfect
attempt at editing and translating any fragment of Utpaladeva’s lost
work is better than no attempt at all, and I am confident that my
mistakes will soon be corrected by scholars more learned than me.

The Context of the Fragment ad ĪPK 1.5.4-5:

The Debate between a Vijñānavādin and a Sautrāntika

and the Problem of the Other Conscious Streams

In ĪPK 1.5.4-5,12 Utpaladeva lets a Sautrāntika criticize the
Vijñānavādins’ idealistic thesis that the universe is merely an internal
form taken on by consciousness and that phenomenal variety is the result
of an internal mechanism of latent traces or imprints (vāsanā). In the
course of this criticism, not only does the Sautrāntika attack the
Vijñānavādins’ position regarding the status of the external object:13
he also argues that the Vijñānavāda can only lead to solipsism, since in
the Vijñānavādin’s perspective, other subjects must be mere internal
aspects of my own stream or series (santāna) of momentary cognitive
events. I have examined elsewhere the details of this controversy,14 so
here I shall only give a basic summary of it.

The Vijñānavādin denies the accusation of solipsism by using
Dharmakīrti’s line of argument in the Santānāntarasiddhi.15 According to
Dharmakīrti, just as in a system that admits the reality of entities
external to consciousness, in the idealistic system of the Vijñānavāda,
the other streams of consciousness cannot be directly perceived (since a
consciousness cannot be directly apprehended by another consciousness
but only by itself); yet, just as in a system that accepts the reality
of external entities, in the Vijñānavāda, the other streams of
consciousness can be inferred. This inference of the existence of other
conscious entities or streams of momentary cognitions rests on the fact
that we experience in ourselves that when we act (and for instance when
we speak), our action is preceded by a will to act. So when we witness
an action that has not been preceded by our own will to act, we can
infer that this action was preceded by a desire to act that does not
belong to our own stream of cognitions – and this other willing entity
must be another conscious subject.

To this argument the Sautrāntika replies that the Vijñānavādin’s own
presuppositions prevent him from making the very inference that he
defends. He thus shows that the Vijñānavādin has no means of
establishing the invariable concomitance on which his inference of other
conscious streams rests. For indeed, I can observe an invariable
concomitance between my own speech and my previous desire to speak, so
that the logical pervasion (vyāpti) between “I want to speak” and “I am
speaking” is established; but in the case where I hear a speech that is
not uttered by me, my thought does not take the form “I am speaking” but
the form “he/she is speaking”. Now, the Vijñānavādin has no way of
establishing any invariable concomitance between the thought “I want to
speak” (in someone else’s conscious stream) and the thought “X is
speaking” (in my conscious stream when I hear someone else speaking).
The two propositions “I want to speak” and “I am speaking” are
essentially linked to the subject, or they are not “separated”
(vicchinna) from the “I”, whereas the proposition “X is speaking” is
separated from the “I” since it is expressed by using the third
grammatical person, and we have no way of determining that there is a
causal relationship (kāryakāraṇabhāva) between somebody else
subjectively thinking “I want to speak” and our own objective16 thought
“X is speaking”, so that the cause of the phenomenon “X is speaking”
remains perfectly unknown.

The Vijñānavādin replies that in fact this necessary relation between
the subjective cognition “I want to speak” and the objective cognition
“X is speaking” is constantly apprehended in the ordinary world, because
our actions are always related to our awareness that they can be
witnessed by others: when we act, we act while desiring either to be
seen acting or not to be seen acting, but whether we conceal our actions
or whether we act ostentatiously, we are aware that our desire to act
does not merely result in the cognition “I am acting” (which occurs in
my conscious stream) but also in the cognition “X is acting” (which
occurs in the other conscious streams witnessing my action). And
according to the Vijñānavādin, it is thanks to this understanding of the
invariable concomitance between my subjective desire to act and the fact
that my action becomes an object of cognition for the others that the
inference of other conscious streams is possible.

The following passage of the Vivr̥ti begins with the Vijñānavādin’s
explanation of this very argument, after which Utpaladeva (or, as
Abhinavagupta says, the Īśvarādvayavādin, the “proponent of the thesis
of the non-duality [of the universe] with the Lord”) helps the
Sautrāntika criticize the Vijñānavādin’s position. Utpaladeva points out
that this position entails a logical circle, because our awareness of
the existence of other conscious entities is supposed to stem from our
awareness that the others can witness our actions, while our awareness
that the others can witness our actions must derive from our awareness
of the existence of other conscious entities. He also points out that in
fact there is no such thing as an invariable concomitance between the
subjective thought “I want to be heard by others” and the objective
thought “X is speaking”, because we sometimes experience that we can
speak without being heard whether we want it or not: thus the causality
relationship invoked by the Vijñānavādin between a subjective will to
act and the objective awareness that X is acting cannot be established.

The Śaiva non-dualist concludes from this that the other subject can
only be established when the other’s action is perceived both by him/her
(in the form “I want to speak/I am speaking”) and by me (in the form
“he/she is speaking”), from the supposition that the same action is then
apprehended in these two different forms. For we have to make this
assumption in order to justify the unity of the sphere of human practice
(vyavahāra): if we do not accept it, then we cannot justify our belief
that the other subjects share with us the same spatio-temporal
determinations and therefore live in a common world, and the notion of
intersubjectivity collapses.

As Abhinavagupta makes clear in his commentary, the Śaiva non-dualists
have a solution to this problem of intersubjectivity:17 according to
them, the unity of the sphere of human practice is to be explained as
the result of the constant activity of division and synthesis through
which the universal consciousness appears to itself in the form of
several distinct subjects and yet is capable of unifying these subjects
in terms of spatial and temporal determinations, because although it
manifests itself as plural, it remains fundamentally one, just as a
dreaming consciousness is capable of dividing itself into a multiplicity
of characters without losing its unity. Recognizing the others is
therefore understood by Utpaladeva as a partial “recognition of the
Lord” (īśvarapratyabhijñā), i.e. as the incomplete realization of the
dynamism inherent in consciousness: when I witness an activity that is
not mine in the world, I recognize in that activity a freedom that is
nothing but the essence of my own subjectivity, so that my awareness of
the existence of other subjects is not the result of an inference based
on causality (“another conscious entity must have produced this
action”): rather, it arises from an inference based on the identity of
nature (svabhāva) between the freedom to act and consciousness.

Nonetheless, in the Vivr̥ti fragment below, this solution remains mostly
implicit,18 because the Śaiva non-dualist is almost immediately
interrupted (at least if we follow Abhinavagupta’s commentary)19 by the
Sautrāntika, who takes advantage (or at least thinks he does so) of
Utpaladeva’s criticism of the Vijñānavāda so as to put forward his own
position. He agrees with the Śaiva non-dualist that the Vijñānavādin
fails to explain the spatio-temporal determination (avadhāra) of the
other subjects (a reproach that Vasubandhu had already faced in his
Viṁśikā)20 and he points out that the only option left to the
Vijñānavādin trying to infer the existence of other subjects is to admit
that the thought formulated as “I want to act/I am acting” in one given
conscious stream projects an image of itself in another conscious stream
(an image that takes the form “he/she is acting”): the other subject
must be inferred as the reflected object (bimba) producing in my
conscious stream the reflection (pratibimba) “he/she is acting”, just as
a particular reflection in a mirror presupposes the existence of a
reflected object which exists outside of the mirror and gives it its
particular shape.

At first sight, this theory must be appealing to the Vijñānavādin
opponent as it seems to fit his idealism: if he adopts it, he can admit
the existence of several conscious streams projecting reflections of
themselves onto each other without conceding the existence of external
objects. As a matter of fact, there is evidence in several Yogācāra
texts that at least some Buddhist idealists held this thesis and used it
so as to explain the fact that several subjects seem to perceive the
same objects: according to those texts, the objects apprehended by the
senses must be reflecting an “original” object in the ālayavijñāna,21
and this “original” object is in turn a reflection of images occurring
in other conscious streams.22 This idea that the phenomenal variety
experienced in one conscious stream is the result of the influence of
another conscious stream rather than of an external object is found in
particular in Vasubandhu’s Viṁśikā23 (demonstrably known of Utpaladeva
and Abhinavagupta).24

Of course, such an explanation is not without danger for the
Vijñānavādin, since as the Sautrāntika points out in Abhinavagupta’s
ĪPV, acknowledging the existence of entities distinct from my own
cognitive stream (be they other conscious streams) seems to pave the way
for externalism.25 But whereas in the ĪPV, the Sautrāntika apparently
targets in a general way any idealistic thesis that concedes the
existence of a plurality of conscious streams while denying the reality
of anything external to them, in the fragment presented here, he seems
to have in mind, more specifically, the idealistic contention that
phenomenal variety can be explained as a result of the mutual influence
of various conscious streams; and he shows that such a thesis leads to
an absurd consequence, since each conscious stream should then perceive
an infinite number of objects, just as (according to Abhinavagupta’s
image) several mirrors reflecting each other produce an infinite number
of reflections.

The fragment ends on an objection made by the Vijñānavādin. The latter
readily accepts that all the other manifestations contained in other
conscious streams do not project reflections of themselves onto my
conscious stream (he agrees that this would lead to an absurd
consequence), but he argues that some of these manifestations in other
conscious streams awaken a particular imprint (vāsanā) already contained
in my own conscious stream and left by previous experiences. He thus
uses the theory of the vāsanā mechanism to explain why we only perceive
a limited number of objects.

Unfortunately, the end of the discussion (won by the Sautrāntika, at
least in this part of the treatise) is missing. This is all the more
regrettable since in the corresponding passage of the ĪPVV,
Abhinavagupta alludes to a very interesting discussion on ālayavijñāna26
– an important topic for the historian of Buddhist doctrines, and one
that is not found in Utpaladeva’s ĪPK and Vr̥tti, nor in Abhinavagupta’s
ĪPV, but that may well have been treated in some detail in Utpaladeva’s
Vivr̥ti.

Nonetheless, the fragment as it stands is of great interest, not only
because it confirms once again how faithful Abhinavagupta’s ĪPVV is to
the text on which it comments (all the ideas mentioned in the
corresponding passage of the ĪPVV are to be found in the Vivr̥ti), or
because it confirms interpretations of the ĪPV that were so far only
based on the ĪPVV,27 but also because it illustrates Utpaladeva’s
intimate acquaintance with Buddhist theories in general,28 and his
interest for the Buddhist debate over the epistemological (and/or
ontological)29 status of other streams of consciousness in particular.
The reason for this interest probably lies in the fact that Utpaladeva’s
system is a variety of absolute idealism: according to him, the universe
is nothing but a manifestation of a single and all-powerful
consciousness out of which nothing exists. He therefore shares with the
Vijñānavāda the burden of dealing with the accusation of solipsism, and
he is all the more attentive to this problem since he wants to offer a
solution capable of superseding both that of the Vijñānavādins and that
of their externalist opponents, the Sautrāntikas. His strategy, here as
often, consists in letting the Sautrāntika triumph over the Vijñānavādin
before showing (as he will in the following verses) that the Sautrāntika
view regarding both objects and other subjects is untenable.30 His
source regarding the Vijñānavādins’ position in this fragment is in all
probability Dharmakīrti’s Santānāntarasiddhi (a treatise that was read
by the Śaiva philosophers, whether dualist or non-dualist).31 As for his
source regarding the Sautrāntika opponent, it is difficult to judge to
what extent it is borrowed from externalist objections answered by
Dharmakīrti in the Santānāntarasiddhi, and one might also suspect that
Utpaladeva is inventing a Sautrāntika position rather than depicting a
real historical position.32 However, it seems to me that Utpaladeva’s
pūrvapakṣas are hardly ever (if at all) figments of his imagination, and
that on the contrary, they show a precise knowledge of his opponents’
theories, as can be verified in all instances where his particular
source can be determined and has come down to us. In this regard, it is
worth noting that Abhinavagupta mentions in his commentary on the
missing end of this fragment a lost work by Dharmottara, the
Bāhyārthasiddhi:33 for now at least, it seems to me that we cannot rule
out the possibility that the latter text was one of Utpaladeva’s sources
(if not his main source) for his depiction of the Sautrāntikas’ position
in this debate.

A Fragment of Utpaladeva’s Vivr̥ti ad ĪPK 1.5.4-534

nanu yatra parajñānaviṣayābhāvāpattivāraṇena nijaṣṭhīvanādiceṣṭām
icchet, tatra paṭādyapavāraṇādinaiva †. . .†35, yatra punar anyathaiva
tathā ceṣṭate, tatra parajñānaviṣayabhāvagamanābhisandhir asty eva.

tad etan mandamatibhāṣitaṁ parapramātr̥pravibhāgapratyayasya vyutpatteḥ.
tathābhūtavyāhārādy-36avabhāsenaiva hi pramātrantaraniścayaḥ syāt, tad
etad itaretarāśrayatvam, vyāhārādy-37avabhāsaviśeṣaiḥ
pramātrantaragatiḥ, tadgatyā ca
tajjñānagatavyāhārādyavabhāsajananāyābhisandher viśiṣṭād
vyāhārādyavabhāsaviśeṣāḥ. yadi hi38 paratrotpādanābhisandheḥ
paratrotpannanr̥ttaṣṭhīvanodgrāhaṇādyavabhāsānāṁ svātmano vicchinnānāṁ
pramāṇāntarāt kāryakāraṇabhāvo’vagataḥ syāt, tat svātmany api
vicchinnaṣṭhīvanādyavabhāsair anyair apy anyadā pramātrantaram
anumīyetāpi, yāvatānyataḥ parapramātary avijñāte
tadgataṣṭhīvanādyābhāseṣv anavagateṣu kathaṁ svātmagatair api tair
vicchinnair ābhāsaiḥ parasantānānumānam.

na ca paro māṁ paśyatv ity abhisandhānāt parasantāne
vicchinnavyāhārādyavabhāsotpattir yuktā, tathābhisandhāne mā drākṣīd iti
vā viparītābhisandhāne tadanutpattiprasaṅgāt.

tad eva[ṁ] tad buddhisamīhāyuktapramātravicchinnāt
tatpratyakṣatānuṣaṅgina eva yathāvadhāritotpādakra[ma]m avasthitād
vyāhārādyavabhāsāt siddhyet pramātrantaraṁ yathāsmābhir vakṣyate.

evaṁ ca viśiṣṭadeśakālatāpi tasya tadāveśāt sidhyati, [a]nyathā39
yathāvabhātadeśasthenaiva pramātrantareṇa paratrāsau janyeteti kuto
niścayaḥ.

etāvat punaḥ syāt, buddhisamīhājanita-svapratyakṣavyāhārādyavabhāsād
utpadyate parapramātr̥ṣu vicchinnas tathāvabhāsaḥ pratibimbam iva, tataś
ca tadutpādakabimbabhūtavyāhārāvabhāsānumānamukhena parapramātānumīyeta.

ity evaṁ ca ghaṭapaṭādyavabhāsā api kvacana krimisarvajñādipramātrantare
sthitās tatsadr̥śābhāsa-40 sahabhāvinaḥ pramātrantarasyāpy avabhāsāñ
janayeyuḥ, tathā ca bāhyārthavādaprakāra eva syāt, jñānabāhyānām
ābhāsabhede hetutvābhyupagamaviśeṣaḥ, yato’vabhāsānāṁ41
svasadr̥śāvabhāsāntarajanakatve pramātr̥ṣv ābhāsāparyavasānaṁ42 syāt, tair
apy anya[syā]nyasya jananād iti.

athāpi parapramātr̥gatāvabhāsās tathāvabhāsajanikāṁ vāsanām eva
prabodhayanti, na tu svato janayanti yenābhāsānantyaṁ syāt. vāsanā hy
avabhāsāntaraśate nādhipatitvocitaikaiveti43 pratipramātrekam eva
tadavabhāsaṁ janayatīti nātiprasaṅgaḥ.

A Tentative Translation

[­– Objection from the Vijñānavādin:] But in the [case] where one wants
to accomplish one’s own activity – such as spitting etc. – while hiding
it so as to prevent it from becoming an object for [someone] else’s
cognition, it is only while concealing [it] for instance behind a screen
[that one acts?],44 whereas in the [case] where one performs the same
action [of spitting] but in a different way[, i.e. without concealing
it],45 there must be an intention (abhisandhi) [of accomplishing the
action while] becoming the object of someone else’s cognition.46

[­– Answer from the Śaiva non-dualist momentarily siding with the
Sautrāntika:]47 This [statement can only be] uttered by some simpleton,
because of [the way in which it] explains the origin (vyutpatti) of the
knowledge that the other subject is distinct [from myself]; for
[according to this thesis,] it is only thanks to the manifestation of
e.g. [my action] of speaking, which is such [, i.e. which involves the
intention of being heard or not by someone else,]48 that one can
ascertain [the existence of] another subject. Therefore [your reasoning
involves] this logical circle (itaretarāśrayatva): the knowledge of [the
existence of] another subject [supposedly occurs] thanks to the
particular manifestations [of my actions] such as speaking, [i.e. this
knowledge supposedly occurs thanks to my awareness that my own speech is
particularized by an intention to be heard by the other;] and it is
thanks to this [very] knowledge [, i.e. the knowledge that the other
subject exists,] that the particular manifestations of [my actions] such
as speaking [can arise] from an intention that is particularized
[inasmuch as it] aims at producing the manifestation [of my own action]
of e.g. speaking inside that [other] consciousness [in the form “this
person is speaking”].49 For if [we] could understand through some other
means of knowledge [i.e. perception] the relation of cause and effect
between [my] intention of making [these manifestations of my actions]
arise in someone else [and] the manifestations [of my actions] such as
dancing, spitting or arguing that arise in another [conscious stream
when I am acting while being] distinct from myself [i.e. expressed in
the other conscious stream as “he/she is acting” and not as “I am
acting”,] then the other subject could also be inferred at some other
time [, i.e. when this relation is not perceived,] from the
manifestations [in my own conscious stream] of [actions of which I am
not the agent] such as spitting and so on [that] are separated [from me
in so far as they occur objectively in myself as “X is spitting”, etc.,]
although [these manifestations] which [occur] in myself are different
[from what the other subject must be thinking in the subjective form “I
want to spit” – just as a fire is inferred from smoke although smoke is
different from fire].50 But [I] cannot know the manifestations such as
spitting and so on that reside in the [other subject, e.g. in the form
“he/she is spitting” when I am spitting,] because the other subject is
not known through any other [means of knowledge besides inference, i.e.
through perception,51 and since therefore the relation of cause and
effect between the subjective will “I want to spit” and the objective
thought “he/she is spitting” remains unknown,] how could the inference
of another conscious stream [take place] through manifestations which,
although existing in myself, are separated [from myself, in the form “X
is spitting”]?

Moreover,52 it is not [true] that the arising in some other [conscious]
stream of a manifestation of [an action of] e.g. speaking separated
[from the subject, i.e. taking the form “X is speaking”,] is [only]
possible due to the [previous] intention [in my own conscious stream]
“may the other see me”; because whether [the acting subject has] such an
intention [of being seen acting] or whether [he has] the contrary
intention “may [the other] not see [me acting]”, an absence of arising
of the [manifestation of this action in the form “X is acting”] can
ensue.53

Therefore [since it is] so, as we shall explain [later], another subject
can be established from the manifestation of [his/her action of], e.g.
speaking, [a manifestation which is] not separated from [this] subject
endowed with a will [to speak consisting in] a cognition, [i.e. a
manifestation which is expressed in that subject as “I want to speak”,]
only (eva) [when this manifestation] involves (anuṣaṅgin) its
perceptibility for the [hearer as well, i.e. only if this manifestation
is perceived by me54 too and not just by the other subject, and] comes
to existence according to the [specific] order of [phonological]
production determined (avadhārita) [by the various causes that are the
points of articulation and the phonatory organs of the speaker].55

[­The Sautrāntika:]56 And [it is] thus [only – i.e. it is only if this
manifestation of the action of speaking is common to both subjects and
determined by the same conditions – that we can] establish as well the
fact that this [other subject] has the particular place and time
[associated with his/her manifestation in my conscious stream,] because
[then this fact] belongs to this [manifestation of speech shared by both
cognitive streams]. Otherwise how could [we] be certain that this
[manifestation of an activity of speech] must have been produced in some
other [stream of consciousness, i.e. mine,] by another subject who
resides precisely in [the particular] place where it is manifested [to
me]?57

But this only can be [admitted by the Vijñānavādin]58: from a
manifestation such as [my action of] speaking that is directly perceived
in myself [and] produced by a will [consisting in] a cognition, such a
manifestation arises in the other subjects [as being] separated [from
their own subjectivity, in the form “he/she is acting”,] as a reflection
(pratibimba) [arises in a mirror]; and therefore, the other subject must
be inferred through an inference [based on] this manifestation of
speech, as being the reflected object (bimba) that produces this
[reflection in my own conscious stream].

And [if the Vijñānavādin admits that this is] so, [i.e. if he accepts
that there is a plurality of conscious streams reflecting their images
onto each other, but no external object,] even the manifestations of
[objects such as] a pot, a cloth and so on which reside in any other
subject – whether a worm or an omniscient [being], etc.­ – should
produce manifestations occurring simultaneously [and] with aspects
similar to [what the worm or the omniscient being, etc., perceive] for
[any] other subject as well; and thus [this inference of the other
conscious streams as entities reflected in my own conscious stream that
the Vijñānavādin is ready to accept] is [in fact] nothing but a variety
of externalism. [That is to say, it is] the particular acknowledgement
that [entities] external to cognitions are the causes of the phenomenal
difference[s], since if the manifestations [in other conscious streams]
were what produces other manifestations similar to them [in my conscious
stream,] there would be an infinite number (aparyavasāna) of
manifestations in [each of] the subjects, because these [reflections in
my conscious stream] would in turn produce another [reflection in
another conscious stream, and] another[, and so on ad infinitum].59

[­– Objection from the Vijñānavādin:] But still, the manifestations
occurring in another subject only awaken an imprint (vāsanā) that [in
turn] produces manifestations of the same sort, but they do not produce
[these manifestations] by themselves, which would [indeed] lead to an
infinite number of manifestations. For one imprint only is not capable
of influencing (adhipatitva) the innumerable other manifestations;
therefore it [merely] produces a manifestation of the [previously
experienced object] that is only one for each subject – therefore there
is no absurd consequence [involved in our theory].60

* This article was written thanks to the generous financial help of the
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, as part of project FR 2531/3-1. I am
(as usual) greatly indebted to Alexis Sanderson, who generously shared
with me some of his copies of manuscripts of the ĪPV as well as his
enthusiasm for the historical study of the Pratyabhijñā texts, and to
Vincent Eltschinger, Eli Franco and Harunaga Isaacson, who read a
previous version of this paper, corrected a number of mistakes, engaged
in lengthy discussions on several difficult points and provided many
insightful remarks.

Bibliographical References

Manuscripts

D = Īśvarapratyabhijñā[-Vr̥tti,] Vivr̥ti [and Vimarśinī], Delhi, National
Archives of India (Manuscripts belonging to the Archaeology and Research
Department, Jammu and Kashmir Government, Srinagar), no. 30, vol. 9
[“Pratyabhijñāvivr̥tiḥ by Utpaladeva”, śāradā script].

D2 = Īśvarapratyabhijñāvimarśinī by Abhinavagupta, Delhi, National
Archives of India (Manuscripts belonging to the Archaeology and Research
Department, Jammu and Kashmir Government, Srinagar), no. 5, vol. 2,
[śāradā script].

S3 = Īśvarapratyabhijñāvimarśinī, Śrinagar, Oriental Research Library,
no. 838 (Īśvarapratyabhijñākaumudi) [śāradā script].

SOAS = Īśvarapratyabhijñāvimarśinī, London, School of Oriental and
African Studies Library, no. 207 in R.C Dogra’s 1978 catalogue / MS no.
44255 [“Pratyabhijñāsūtra with Abhinavagupta’s Sūtrārthavimarśinī”,
śāradā script].

Editions

Bhāskarī = Īśvarapratyabhijñāvimarśinī of Abhinavagupta, Doctrine of
Divine Recognition, vols. I-II: Sanskrit text with the commentary
Bhāskarī edited by K.A.S. Iyer and K.C. Pandey [Allahabad, 1938, 1950],
vol. III: English translation by K.C. Pandey [Allahabad, 1954], Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass, 1986.

ĪPK = Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikā: See Torella [1994] 2002.

ĪPV= Īśvarapratyabhijñāvimarśinī, edited with notes by M.R. Shāstrī and
M. K. Shāstrī, KSTS 22 & 33, 2 vols., Srinagar: Nirnaya Sagar Press,
1918-21.

ĪPVV = Īśvarapratyabhijñāvivr̥tivimarśinī by Abhinavagupta, ed. M.K.
Shāstrī, KSTS 60, 62 & 65, 3 vols., Bombay: Nirnaya Sagar Press,
1938-43.

PVin = Dharmakīrti’s Pramāṇaviniścaya, Chapters 1 and 2, Critically
edited by E. Steinkellner, Beijing/Vienna: China Tibetology Publishing
House/Austrian Academy of Sciences Press, 2007.

[Santānāntaradūṣaṇa, in] Ratnakīrtinibandhāvaliḥ, ed. A. Thakur, Patna:
Kashi Prasad Jayaswal Research Institute, 2nd edn., 1975, pp. 145-49.

Santānāntarasiddhi (rec.) = Santānāntarasiddhiḥ of Ācārya Dharmakīrti
and Santānāntarasiddhiḥ Ṭīkā of Ācārya Vinītadeva, restored and edited
by J.S. Negi, Bibliotheca Indo Tibetica Series 37, Sarnath–Varanasi:
Central Institute of Higher Tibetan Studies, 1997.

Viṁśikā, Viṁśikāvr̥tti = Vijñaptimātratāsiddhi. Deux traités de
Vasubandhu. Viṁśatikā accompagnée d’une explication en prose et Triṁśikā
avec le commentaire de Sthiramati, publié par S. Lévi, Paris:
Bibliothèque de l’École des Hautes Études 245, 1925.

Vivr̥ti (fragments) = See Torella 1988; 2007a-d; Ratié (forthcoming).

Translations and studies

Chu, J., 2011, “Sanskrit Fragments of Dharmakīrti’s
Santānāntarasiddhi*”, in H. Krasser et al. (eds.) Religion and Logic in
Buddhist Philosophical Analysis: Proceedings of the Fourth International
Dharmakīrti Conference, Vienna, 23-27 August 2005, Wien: Österreichische
Akademie der Wissenschaften, pp. 33-42.

Formigatti, C.A., 2011, Sanskrit Annotated Manuscripts from Northern
India and Nepal, Unpublished Ph.D. Thesis, Universität Hamburg.

Kajiyama, Y., 1965, “Buddhist Solipsism: A Free Translation of
Ratnakīrti’s Saṁtānāntaradūṣaṇa”, Journal of Indian and Buddhist
Studies, 13(1): 9-24.

Kano, K., 2008, “Two Short Glosses on Yogācāra Texts by
Vairocanarakṣita: Viṁśikāṭīkāvivr̥ti and *Dharmadharmatāvibhāgavivr̥ti”,
in F. Sferra (ed.) Manuscripta Buddhica 1: Sanskrit Texts from Giuseppe
Tucci’s Collection, part I, Roma: Istituto Italiano per l’Africa e
l’Oriente, pp. 343-80.

Katsura, S., 2007, “Dharmakīrti’s Proof of the Existence of Other
Minds”, in B. Kellner, H. Krasser et al. (eds.) Pramāṇakīrtiḥ: Papers
Dedicated to Ernst Steinkellner on the Occasion of His 70th Birthday,
Wiener Studien zur Tibetologie und Buddhismuskunde 70.2, Wien:
Arbeitskreis für tibetische und buddhistische Studien Universität Wien,
pp. 407-22.

Kitagawa, H., 1955, “A Refutation of Solipsism (Annotated Translation of
the Santānāntarasiddhi)”, Journal of the Greater India Society, 14(1-2):
1-32.

McCrea, L.J. and P. Patil, 2010, Buddhist Philosophy of Language in
India – Jñānaśrīmitra on Exclusion, New York: Columbia University Press.

Ratié, I., 2007, “Otherness in the Pratyabhijñā Philosophy”, Journal of
Indian Philosophy, 35(4): 313-70.

———, 2010, “The Dreamer and the Yogin: On the Relationship between
Buddhist and Śaiva Idealisms”, Bulletin of the School of Oriental and
African Studies, 73(3): 437-78.

———, 2011a, Le Soi et l’Autre. Identité, différence et altérité dans la
philosophie de la Pratyabhijñā, Jerusalem Studies in Religion and
Culture 13, Leiden-Boston: Brill.

———, 2011b, “Can One Prove that Something Exists Beyond Consciousness? A
Śaiva Criticism of the Sautrāntika Inference of External Objects”,
Journal of Indian Philosophy, 39(4-5): 479-501.

———, forthcoming, “Some Hitherto Unknown Fragments of Utpaladeva’s
Vivr̥ti (II): Against the Existence of External Objects”, in D. Goodall
and P.S. Filliozat (eds.) Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire de N.
Ramacandra Bhatt.

Schmithausen, L., 1987, Ālayavijñāna. On the Origin and the Early
Development of a Central Concept of Yogācāra Philosophy, vol. I: Text,
vol. II: Notes, Bibliography and Indices, Tokyo: The International
Institute for Buddhist Studies.

———, 2005, On the Problem of the External World in the Ch’eng wei shih
lun, Studia Philologica Buddhica (Occasional Paper Series) 13, Tokyo:
The International Institute for Buddhist Studies.

Torella, R., 1988, “A Fragment of Utpaladeva’s
Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti”, East and West, 38: 137-74.

———, 1992, “The Pratyabhijñā and the Logical-Epistemological School of
Buddhism”, in T. Goudriaan (ed.) Ritual and Speculation in Early
Tantrism, Studies in Honor of André Padoux, SUNY Series in Tantric
Studies, Albany: State University of New York Press, pp. 327-45.

——— [1994] 2002: Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikā of Utpaladeva with the
Author’s Vr̥tti, critical edition and annotated translation [Roma, 1994],
Corrected Edition, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.

———, 2007a, “Studies on Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti. Part I:
anupalabdhi and apoha in a Śaiva Garb”, in K. Preisendanz (ed.)
Expanding and Merging Horizons: Contributions to South Asian and
Cross-Cultural Studies in Commemoration of Wilhelm Halbfass, Wien:
Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, pp. 473-90.

———, 2007b, “Studies on Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti. Part II:
What Is Memory?”, in K. Klaus and J.-U. Hartmann (eds.) Indica et
Tibetica. Festschrift für Michael Hahn zum 65. Geburtstag von Freunden
und Schülern überreicht, Wiener Studien zur Tibetologie und
Buddhismuskunde 66, Wien: Arbeitskreis für Tibetische und Buddhistische
Studien Universität Wien, pp. 539-63.

———, 2007c, “Studies on Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti. Part
III: Can a Cognition Become the Object of Another Cognition?”, in D.
Goodall and A. Padoux (eds.) Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d’Hélène
Brunner, Collection Indologie 106, Pondichéry: Institut Français de
Pondichéry/École Française d’Extrême-Orient, pp. 475-84.

———, 2007d, “Studies on Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti. Part IV:
Light of the Subject, Light of the Object”, in B. Kellner, H. Krasser et
al. (eds.), Pramāṇakīrtiḥ: Papers Dedicated to Ernst Steinkellner on the
Occasion of His 70th Birthday, Wiener Studien zur Tibetologie und
Buddhismuskunde 70.2, Wien: Arbeitskreis für tibetische und
buddhistische Studien Universität Wien, pp. 925-40.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 See Torella 1988 (this first part of the fragment was in fact edited
from a transcript of the original manuscript D later found by Raffaele
Torella in the National Archives of India and used for the edition of
the remaining parts of the fragment); 2007a-d.

2 See Torella 1988: 140; [1994] 2002: xliii.

3 For a study of some marginal annotations in ĪPV manuscripts (which
does not, however, bear on fragments of the Vivr̥ti), see Formigatti
2011.

4 See Ratié 2011a: 250. Abhinavagupta gives a complete quotation of the
verse in ĪPV I: 130 while explicitly ascribing it to Utpaladeva (yad āha
granthakāra eva), and from ĪPVV, vol. III, p. 404, it is obvious that
the verse was the first of a series concluding the Vivr̥ti: vivr̥tikāraḥ
saṁkṣipya sarvam āhettham ity
ādiślokaiḥ. anenāsmadukteneśvaratāprakāreṇa yā svasaṁvittiḥ* sthitā tām.
[*svasaṁvittiḥ corr.: susaṁvittiḥ ĪPVV]. According to the ĪPV the verse
runs as follows: itthaṁ svasaṁvittim apahnuvānair yat tad vadadbhiḥ
kaluṣīkr̥taṁ yat । pramātr̥tattvaṁ sphuṭayuktibhis tān mūkān vidhāya
prakaṭīkr̥taṁ tat ।। “After having thus reduced to silence through clear
arguments those who, denying their [own] self-consciousness, hold this
or that thesis, [I] have made obvious the true nature of the subject [so
far] stained by them.”

5 See Torella 2007b: 544, n 14; 2007c: 479, n 8; 2007d: 929, n 11.

6 See Yohei Kawajiri’s contribution to this volume.

7 D2, SOAS and S3 all contain the passage from pūrvāvabhāsitavastunaḥ. .
. to vicitrecchābodhitāvabhāsabhedavāsanāmātropapāditavikalparū-
pavijñānāpohanaśaktiḥ (as noted in Torella 2007a: 480, n 38, so does
110, n 71, in the Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies edition of the ĪPV
I; the three manuscripts as well as the ĪPV footnote invert the two
sentences) and the passage from smr̥tyādīnām idānīṁ. . . to sambhavam āha
in Torella 2007b: 544 (which is also quoted in ĪPV I: 116, n 17).

8 D2 and SOAS both contain the passage from arthitvāc ca . . . (the two
manuscripts bear the reading arthitāvaśāt . . .) to avabhāso bhavati in
Torella 2007b: 547 (Torella notes in n 44 that the same passage is found
in n 62, p. 124 of ĪPV I, and that the text of the footnote shows some
“significant divergence” from the text he has established. It is worth
noting in this regard that while D2 bears exactly the same reading as
that found in the ĪPV n, the text in SOAS differs from it in several
instances, among which upajātāyāṁ, also found in manuscript D used by
Raffaele Torella for his edition, but for which D2 and the ĪPV n have
upayāyamānāyāṁ); the passage from kadācit punar . . . to na kṣatiḥ in
Torella 2007b: 548 (as noted in Torella 2007b: 548, n 51, this passage
is also quoted in ĪPV I: 125, n 67; the text of the footnote has the
same variant readings as the two manuscripts); the passage from aham
anvabhūvam iti . . . to anubhāvyadharmopacāreṇa in Torella 2007c: 481
(in fact this passage is also found in ĪPV I: 129-30, n 69; SOAS bears
the obviously mistaken reading iti vā pūrvapakṣānubhavasya instead of
iti vā pūrvānubhavasya); and the passage from pratyakṣapr̥ṣṭapātināpi . .
. to parāmarśa ity āha in Torella 2007d: 930 (the sentence is also
quoted in ĪPV I: 142, n 141).

9 S3 quotes the passage from viṣayopalabdhr̥tāpy arthasya . . . to
tatpūrvakāloparaktānubhūtabhāvāvamarśanāvasānā in Torella 2007b: 544-45;
the passage from tena ca sūtre liṅartho . . . to prakāśanād bhavati in
Torella 2007b: 546-47; the passage from nanu prakāśānupraveśaṁ vinā . .
. to sahaikyaṁ syād iti in Torella 2007c: 481-82; the passage from
yoginām api parabodhaḥ . . . to na tv etannidarśane’nubhavasmr̥tyor
grāhyagrāhakabhāva iti in Torella 2007c: 482 (as noted in Torella 2007c:
482, n 42, this passage is also reproduced in ĪPV I: 137, n 121, from
grāhyabhūmi . . . onwards. Note that both S3 and the ĪPV footnote bear
the reading ’pi vā tasya parabodhasya instead of ’pi vā tasya); the
passage from kadācid dr̥kparāmarśapūrvatvena . . . to dr̥kparāmarśa iti in
Torella 2007d: 931-32; the passage from athāpi yogyadeśasthatayā . . .
to pītasyāpi syāt in Torella 2007d: 937 (in S3 a gloss is interpolated
after vā pratyāsattyā, and the manuscript shows several variant
readings, among which pītasyāpi na syāt instead of pītasyāpi syāt at the
end of the passage).

10 Some of the quotations end with iti ṭīkāyām or iti ṭīkākāraḥ; some
are preceded by tad āha ṭīkākāraḥ or iti darśayati vivr̥tikāraḥ.

11 See also Ratié (forthcoming).

12 tattadākasmikābhāso bāhyaṁ ced anumāpayet । na hy abhinnasya bodhasya
vicitrābhāsahetutā ।। na vāsanāprabodho’tra vicitro hetutām iyāt ।
tasyāpi tatprabodhasya vaicitrye kiṁ nibandhanam ।। “[A Sautrāntika
might] object (cet) [the following]: the manifestation of this or that
[particular object,] which is [apparently] devoid of cause (ākasmika),
must lead [us] to infer an external [reality], for consciousness, which
is [in itself] undifferentiated, cannot be the cause of manifestations
that are varied. [And] the varied awakening of imprints (vāsanā) cannot
be the cause of this [phenomenal variety]; for what would be in turn the
cause of the variety of the awakening of these [imprints]?”

13 On this criticism of the Vijñānavāda by a Sautrāntika as explained in
Abhinavagupta’s commentaries, see Ratié 2010: 453-60.

14 See Ratié 2007 and 2011a (chap. 8).

15 As far as I know the text is entirely preserved in its Tibetan
version only. For an English translation from the Tibetan, see Kitagawa
1955; for a tentative reconstruction of the Sanskrit text, see
Santānāntarasiddhi (rec.), and for a short bibliography of scholarly
works on this text, see Katsura 2007: 408-09. For newly-published
Sanskrit fragments, see also Chu 2011. On Abhinavagupta’s quotation and
summary of Dharmakīrti’s treatise, see Ratié 2007: 323, n 20; 2011a:
591.

16 Objective in the sense that the agent of the action is not
apprehended by him- or herself, subjectively, but as an object distinct
from the “I”.

17 See below, n 55.

18 For an analysis of Utpaladeva’s position in this debate see Ratié
2007: 336-68; 2011a: 606-42.

19 See below, n 56.

20 See below, n 57 (on the probability that Vasubandhu’s work originally
bore the title Viṁśikā rather than Viṁśatikā, see Kano 2008: 345).

21 See Schmithausen 1987, vol. II: 415-16 n 769.

22 See Schmithausen 2005: 39-47.

23 Viṁśikā 18ab: anyonyādhipatitvena vijñaptiniyamo mithaḥ । “There is a
mutual determination of representations (vijñapti) due to the fact that
[the various representations in various conscious streams] influence
(adhipatitva) each other.” Cf. Viṁśikāvr̥tti, p. 9: sarveṣāṁ hi sattvānām
anyonyavijñaptyādhipatyena mitho vijñapter niyamo bhavati yathāyogam.
mitha iti parasparataḥ. ataḥ santānāntaravijñaptiviśeṣāt santānāntare
vijñaptiviśeṣa utpadyate nārthaviśeṣāt. “Thus for all living beings
(sattva), due to the fact that representations influence each other,
there is accordingly a determination of representation[s] that is
mutual, i.e. [exerted] by each other. Therefore a particular
representation arises in one [conscious] stream due to the particular
representation of another [conscious] stream[, and] not due to a
particular [external] object.” Note that Vasubandhu, as well as
Sthiramati (see Schmithausen 2005: 44) and Dharmakīrti in the
Santānāntarasiddhi, call this influence of one conscious stream on the
others an adhipati/adhipatipratyaya an – expression used by the
Vijñānavādin portrayed by Utpaladeva in the last paragraph of the
fragment below. And whereas Vasubandhu seems to consider that thanks to
this influence the occurrence of specific representations can be
explained away without having recourse to an external object, Sthiramati
specifies that this influence does not produce the representational
object itself but only functions as some “controlling or directing
condition” (ibid.), and Dharmakīrti contrasts this influencing condition
on a conscious stream “A” of another conscious stream “B” with the
material cause (upādānakāraṇa) that the previous cognition in the
conscious stream “A” constitutes for the next cognition in that same
stream (Kitagawa 1955: 20-21).

24 See e.g. ĪPVV II: 126 (quoted below n 57) and ĪPVV: II: 144 (quoted
in Ratié 2010: 446; 2011a: 391).

25 ĪPV I: 174-75: anumīyamānam api ca bodhāntaram anumātr̥saṁmatād bodhād
yadi bhinnaṁ tad asti tāvat saṁbhavo yat prameyaṁ bodhād bhinnam astīti.
sahopalambhaniyamāder anaikāntikatvān nīlapītādināpi prameyarāśinā kim
apakr̥taṁ yenāsya svarūpaviśrāntir na sahyate. tasmāt pramātrantarāṇām
apy asiddhir eva. “Moreover, if the other consciousness being inferred
is distinct (bhinna) from the consciousness considered as the inferring
subject, then obviously, the possibility arises that the object of
consciousness [too] may be distinct from consciousness! Since [as a
consequence, Dharmakīrti’s idealistic arguments] such as ‘the necessity
[for the object] of being perceived along with [the cognition]’
(sahopalambhaniyama) are inconclusive, what crime have all objects – the
blue, the yellow, etc. – committed that would prevent them from resting
in their own nature [independently of the consciousness apprehending
them]? Therefore, [just as there can be no correct account of phenomenal
variety in the Vijñānavāda,] there can be no demonstration of [the
existence of] other subjects either.” Cf. Ratnakīrti’s remark in the
Santānāntaradūṣaṇa, p. 148: if other streams are admitted to exist
independently of the cognitive stream apprehending them, “then how does
one demonstrate that the external object too does not exist? For [then]
one can cast a doubt on this [non-existence of external objects] as
well” (tarhi bahirarthasyāpi katham abhāvaḥ sidhyati, śakyam hi tatrāpi
sandeham avatārayitum). On the Pratyabhijñā’s exploitation of
Dharmakīrti’s sahopalambhaniyama as formulated in PVin,
Pratyakṣapariccheda 54ab, see Ratié 2011b: 484-86.

26 See ĪPVV II: 128.

27 See, for example, the problem of the interpretation of ĪPV I: 173 and
my divergence with K.C. Pandey’s interpretation in particular (see
Bhāskarī III: 62; Ratié 2011a: 596-97, n 61): it seems to me that the
fragment definitely settles the matter of what the vyāpti attacked by
the Sautrāntika really is.

28 See Torella 1992.

29 As explained elsewhere (see Ratié 2011a: 644, n 133) I believe that
Dharmakīrti’s Santānāntarasiddhi mainly focuses on an epistemological
problem (how do we become aware of the existence of other conscious
streams?) and answers this problem by saying that the other conscious
streams are mere conceptual objects for us, i.e. that the assumption of
their existence is epistemologically valid in the sphere of human
practice (vyavahāra), but cannot be considered as an ultimate truth
since the existence of other streams remains impossible to perceive.
Nonetheless, later Buddhist authors claiming to belong to Dharmakīrti’s
tradition explicitly deny the ontological reality of other conscious
streams, as Ratnakīrti does in his Santānāntaradūṣaṇa (see Kajiyama
1965: 13).

30 On Utpaladeva’s refutation of the Sautrāntikas’ externalism, see
Ratié 2011b.

31 On Abhinavagupta’s and Rāmakaṇṭha’s quotations of this treatise see
Ratié 2011a: 591, nn 50-51.

32 See Ratié 2011b: 481, n 5, on the problematic identity of these
Sautrāntikas.

33 See ĪPVV II: 128. On the hypothesis that Dharmottara may have held a
theory similar to that ascribed by Abhinavagupta to the Sautrāntikas,
and on the ongoing debate among scholars regarding this issue, see e.g.
McCrea and Patil 2010: 141-42, n 71.

34 The passage is quoted on the margins of S3 ad ĪPK 1.5.4-5 (the folio
bears the number 40); it starts on the top of the page, extends on the
right margin down to the bottom of the page, and goes on in the left
margin down to the bottom of the page. The words quoted in
Abhinavagupta’s ĪPVV are underlined and in bold type. I have taken the
liberty of adding punctuation marks and of standardizing the use of the
sandhi whenever needed. Sanskrit words or syllables are in brackets
whenever the akṣaras are barely legible or illegible but obviously
required by the context. All my conjectural emendations are indicated in
footnotes.

35 A few akṣaras (four?) are illegible.

36 -vyāhārādy- conj.: -vyavahārādy- S3.

37 vyāhārādy- conj.: vyavahārādy- S3.

38 yadi hi conj.: yad iha S3.

39 From here on the text is noted on the left margin.

40 tatsadr̥śābhāsa- conj.: tattadr̥śābhāsa- S3.

41 yato’vabhāsānāṁ conj.: yathāvabhāsānāṁ S3.

42 pramātr̥ṣv ābhāsāparyavasānaṁ conj.: pramātr̥prābhā-saparyavasānaṁ S3.

43 nādhipatitvocitaikaiveti conj.: nādhipratitvocitaikaiveti S3.

44 See above, n 35.

45 Cf. ĪPVV II: 122: anyathaivety anapavāryety arthaḥ.

46 This is the reason why, according to the Vijñānavādin, we do know the
invariable concomitance between “I want to act” and “X is acting”: when
we act we are aware that our subjective will to act must produce the
awareness “he/she is acting” in other conscious streams – otherwise we
would not try to hide our actions, nor would we act while wanting the
others to see us. And since the invariable concomitance between “I want
to act” and “X is acting” is known, we can legitimately infer the
existence of a will to act in some other conscious subject when we have
the cognition “he/she is acting” – so our awareness that all our actions
are potential objects for other conscious subjects is the basis of our
inferential knowledge that other subjects exist.

47 See ĪPVV II: 122, quoted and translated in Ratié 2011a: 598-99, n 64.

48 See ĪPVV II: 123: dr̥śyatāṁ hi yadā pāmarakadāserakāv anyonyaṁ
ṣṭhīvato vādināv udgrāhayato yuvānau nr̥tyataḥ, tadāyaṁ para etaj jānātv
iti yad abhisandhānaṁ tat parapramātr̥jñānapūrvakam, parajñānaṁ ca
tathābhisandhijanitanr̥ttābhāsajñānapūrvakam ity anyonyāśrayam. tad āha
tathābhūteti. paratrotpadyatām ayam ābhāsa ity
etadabhisandhānajanito’yam vyāhārābhāsa iti. “For see: when two
low-caste men are spitting on each other, when two philosophers are
arguing, when two young persons are dancing, the intention [occurring]
[in the form]: ‘may this other [person] know this [action of mine]’ must
be preceded by the knowledge of [the existence of] the other subject;
and the knowledge of [the existence of] the other [subject] must be
preceded by the knowledge that the manifestation [in the other conscious
stream] of [my action of] dancing [etc.], results from such an intention
[of being perceived by others] – therefore there is a logical circle.
This is what [Utpaladeva] expresses [by saying] ‘[the manifestation of
the action of speaking,] which is such’ – [i.e.], the manifestation of
[the action of] speaking which is the result of this intention: ‘may
this manifestation [of my action] arise in [someone] else’.”

49 That is, if I understand correctly, the Vijñānavādin is accused here
of grounding his inference of the existence of other subjects on the
fact that my actions are particularized by a will to be perceived by the
others (which is why, according to him, the relation of cause and effect
between the subjective will “I want to speak” and the objective thought
“he/she is speaking” is already ascertained, and can be used as a
consequence to prove that the other subject exists in the form of a
subjective will causing my objective thought “he/she is speaking”),
whereas the very fact that my will is thus particularized already
presupposes the knowledge of the existence of other subjects. Cf. e.g.
ĪPV I: 173: vicchinna ābhāsaḥ paratrotpadyatām iti yā samīhā tayā saha
paratrotpannasya vicchinnābhāsasya kāryakāraṇabhāvagrahaṇam eva
parāsiddhau na yuktam. “The very fact that [I] apprehend the relation of
cause and effect between [my] will [to be heard while speaking – a will
that takes the form] ‘may a manifestation [of my action] separated [from
the subject, i.e. expressed as ‘he/she is speaking’,] arise in the other
[subject]’ – and the manifestation that occurs in the other [subject
and] is separated [from the subject, i.e. takes the form ‘he/she is
speaking’], is not possible if the other [subject] has not been
established [beforehand].”

50 See ĪPVV II: 124: tad anyena dhūmena yathāgnyantarasyāvagamas
tathānyena vicchinnanr̥ttādyavabhāsenānyasya pramātur avasānaṁ ghaṭeta.
“Then just as [we] learn [the existence] of fire, which is one thing,
through [the knowledge of the existence of] smoke, which is [something]
else, in the same way, [we] could determine [the existence of] the
[other] subject, which is one [thing], through a manifestation which is
[something else] such as dancing and so on [since this manifestation
does not take the form ‘I am dancing’ characteristic of a conscious
stream, but rather, is] separated [from the subject in the form ‘he/she
dances’, etc.].”

51 See ĪPVV II: 124: anyata iti pratyakṣāt.

52 According to Abhinavagupta’s commentary (ĪPVV II: 124), Utpaladeva is
now showing that there is no invariable concomitance between the
subjective desire to be seen acting and the objective cognition “X is
acting” (so that the Vijñānavādin cannot rightly claim that the other
subject can be inferred on the basis of the logical pervasion between
these two).

53 That is, my action might not be seen by anybody, whether I want
others to see it or not; and conversely, my action might be seen by
others whereas I do not have any particular intention of showing it to
others: cf. Abhinavagupta’s example of the crying child in ĪPVV I: 124
(see Ratié 2007: 330-31; 2011a: 599).

54 See ĪPVV II: 125: yaḥ pramātā maitraḥ, tasmād avicchinna eva yo
vyāharāmīty ābhāsaḥ svātmani pratyakṣapratibhāsī. . . “The manifestation
‘I am speaking’ that is not separated from the subject [called] Maitra
[and] involves a perceptual image (pratyakṣapratibhāsin) in myself
(svātman) . . .”

55 The passage is difficult and I am not sure whether my interpretation
is correct. At any rate here is what I understand: the Vijñānavādin’s
opponent has just explained that the intention (abhisandhi) of the
speaker willing to be heard by others is not enough to ascertain the
existence of other subjects, and he now explains that the existence of
other subjects must rather be established from the fact that the same
action of speaking is perceived both by the speaker (in the subjective
form “I am speaking”) and by the hearer (in the objective form “he/she
is speaking”) and is determined (avadhārita) in both cases according to
the same spatio-temporal conditions – a fact that the Vijñānavādin is
precisely incapable of justifying. Abhinavagupta considers that here the
Śaiva non-dualist is still speaking and anticipating on his own
explanation of intersubjectivity: according to him, the Śaiva
non-dualistic perspective justifies this unity of experiences belonging
to several subjects in so far as it considers all these subjects as
limited aspects that the all-powerful and all-encompassing consciousness
freely takes on while playfully dividing and synthesizing its
innumerable manifestations. See ĪPVV II: 125: tasminn eva yataś caitraḥ
pramātā parameśvareṇābhāsāntaraikyād upasaṁhr̥tyaikībhāvena sr̥ṣṭaḥ . . .
, tataḥ so ’pi sarvaṁ maitravad evāvabudhyate, paratas tu
śarīrādyahaṁbhāvadārḍhyāt svaparavibhāgagaṇanānapagamād* vikalpayati
maitro vyāharatīty evam īśvaravādisaṁmatam etat. [*-gaṇanānapagamād
conj.: -gaṇanāpagamād ĪPVV] “Because the Highest Lord, after withdrawing
[the individual called Caitra] from the unity of [all] other
manifestations, has created the subject [called] Caitra as being one
[with the subject Maitra] with respect to this very [manifestation of
speech subjectively apprehended in Maitra as ‘I am speaking’], [. . .]
this [Caitra] too is aware of everything exactly as Maitra is; but on
the other hand, because [Caitra] does not cease taking into account the
distinction between himself and the other(s) due to the strength of his
self-identification with his body [, intellect, vital breath and void
which are mere objects that he wrongly considers as himself], he
conceptualizes [this manifestation] in this form: ‘Maitra is speaking’ –
this is the opinion of the proponent of the [non-duality with] the
Lord.” However, Abhinavagupta also considers that up to this point, the
discourse of the protagonist fighting with the Vijñānavādin could be
interpreted as an expression of the Sautrāntika’s opinion
(bāhyavādimata, ibid.). I assume that this is the case because so far
this protagonist has not explained how this unity of experiences
pertaining to various subjects is possible (the Śaiva non-dualist
explains it as a result of the dynamism of consciousness, which is
capable of dividing itself without ceasing to be one, whereas the
Sautrāntika justifies it by having recourse to the existence of an
external world common to all subjects). But whatever the interpretation
chosen, what matters here, according to Abhinavagupta, is the assertion
that the sphere of human practice (vyavahāra) has a fundamental unity
that must be accounted for. See ibid.: ekarūpatā tāvad
vyavahārasyānenoktā. “In any case (tāvat), the [passage] expresses the
unity of the sphere of mundane practice.”

56 According to Abhinavagupta, from here on the Sautrāntika is speaking
again. See ĪPVV II: 126: sā ca bāhyatāyām apīti labdhocchvāso bāhyavādy
āha: evaṁ ceti . . . “And the externalist, who has regained faith [in
the possibility of his victory thanks to the intervention of the Śaiva
non-dualist and considers that] this [unity of the sphere of human
practice is possible] in the externalist perspective as well, says: ‘And
[it is thus] . . .’.”

57 See ĪPVV II: 126: aparathā kampate maitra iti yaś caitrasyābhāsas
taddeśābhāsasahitaḥ, sa brahmalokasthamaitrābh-
idhānapramātrantarajanito na bhavatīti kuto niścayaḥ. “Otherwise how
could [we] be certain that the manifestation ‘Maitra is moving’ that
belongs to Caitra[’s conscious stream and] is associated with the
manifestation of the place [where Caitra is perceiving Maitra] is not
[in fact] produced by another subject called ‘Maitra’ who resides in
Brahma’s world?” Abhinavagupta explains that the Sautrāntika is
insisting on the fact that the other subject must be associated with the
particular time and place where I perceive him/her to exist because he
considers that the Vijñānavādin, according to whom there is no external
world, is unable to account for this fact. See ĪPVV II: 126: evaṁ
taddeśatvādyanavadhāraṇadoṣam uktvā doṣāntaram api vijñānavādina
āpādayaty evaṁ ceti. “Having thus formulated the fault [in the
Vijñānavādin’s thesis consisting in] the fact that the [other subject’s]
existence in that [very] place, etc., cannot be determined
(anavadhāraṇa), he brings about another fault of the Vijñānavādin [in
the sentence beginning with] ‘moreover, since it is so. . .’.” This
accusation is of course reminiscent of the externalist’s objection
addressed by Vasubandhu at the beginning of the Viṁśikā, and as a matter
of fact Abhinavagupta quotes Viṁśikā 2 while commenting on this passage.
See ibid.: tat satyam uktam: na deśakālaniyamaḥ santānaniyamo na । na ca
kr̥tyakriyā yuktā vijñaptir yadi nārthataḥ ।। iti. “Therefore it has
rightly been said that ‘If representation (vijñapti) does not [arise]
from an [external] object, there [can be] no restriction (niyama) [of
this representation to a particular] place and time, nor any restriction
[of this representation to a particular conscious] stream; nor is
efficacy possible [, since dreamt or illusory objects lack efficacy].”

58 According to Abhinavagupta, the gist of the argument about to be
formulated here is as follows: the existence of the other subject must
be inferred on the grounds that a form which is manifest in something as
if it were external to the nature of that thing must have been projected
onto that thing by something else, just as the form of a pot in a mirror
must be the projection of a pot existing outside the mirror. See ibid.:
etāvad eva hi tadā syād yad yatrābhāti* svarūpabahirbhūtam iva ca, tad
anyataḥ saṁkrāntaṁ darpaṇa iva ghaṭādiḥ . . . caitrapramātari cābhāti
vyāhāraḥ svarūpabahirbhāvena maitro vyāharatīti, tad anenānyataḥ
saṁkrāntena bhavitavyam iti svabhāvahetuḥ. [*yad yatrābhāti corr.: yady
atrābhāti ĪPVV] “For then this only can be [admitted by the
Vijñānavādin]: a [thing A] that is manifest in a [thing B] and [is
manifest there] as if it were external to the nature [of B] is [a form]
that has passed [onto B] (saṁkrānta) from [something] else, just as a
pot in a mirror for instance [is the form of a pot external to the
mirror that has passed onto the mirror]. [. . .] And the speech [of
Maitra] is manifest in the subject [called] Caitra as being external to
the nature [of Caitra, in the form] ‘Maitra is speaking’; therefore this
[speech] must be [a form] passed onto [Caitra’s consciousness] from some
other [entity, i.e. another subject] – therefore the inferential reason
[on which the inference of the other subjects’ existence is based] is a
nature [and not an effect].” This thesis is of course reminiscent of the
way in which the Sautrāntika demonstrates the existence of the external
world by inferring the existence of a “reflected object” (bimba)
projecting its form onto consciousness and thus accounting for the
variety and specificity of our perceptions (see Ratié 2011a: 368-76;
2011b: 481-84). But as far as I understand, here the Sautrāntika is
pointing out that the Vijñānavādin is compelled to accept this
explanation of the way we become aware of the other subjects (because he
has no other option left, and also because the thesis that several
streams of consciousness reflect their images onto each other is still
compatible with his idealism and seems to have been held at least by
some Vijñānavādins: see above, nn 22-23). And the Sautrāntika is
insisting on this point because he wants to show (as he will in the next
paragraph) that this explanation of our awareness that other subjects
exist necessarily leads to his own thesis, namely, that of the existence
of an external world.

59 According to Abhinavagupta, the Sautrāntika is explaining here that
the Vijñānavādin has to admit defeat (by conceding the existence of
external objects) because the only idealistic option left to him in this
discussion leads to absurd consequences. This option consists in
considering that the phenomenal variety in my own conscious stream is
ultimately due to manifestations occurring in other conscious streams
and projecting their reflections onto my conscious stream, just as, when
another subject has the cognition “I am speaking”, his/her action is
reflected in my conscious stream in the form “he/she is acting”. This
thesis (on which see above, nn 22-23) has the advantage of enabling the
Vijñānavādin to acknowledge the existence of other subjects while not
having recourse to any reality external to consciousness (since the
universe is then nothing but a variety of consciousnesses reflecting
onto each other their own manifestations). But it is problematic for two
reasons. First, if it were the case then all the manifestations of
objects occurring in one conscious stream should occur in all the
others, so that every conscious stream would be simultaneously conscious
of all objects. Second, the manifestation of an object in a given
conscious stream, which supposedly projects its form onto other
conscious streams, must be considered itself as some sort of reflection
since it appears objectively, in the form “this”, i.e. as separated from
the subject perceiving it, and since it has been established that an
objective thought such as “he/she is speaking” must be a reflection in
one conscious stream of a subjective thought “I am speaking” in some
other conscious stream. If any manifestation of an object in a given
conscious stream is to be considered as a reflection of a manifestation
in some other conscious stream, then in order to avoid an infinite
regress (since my thought “the pot” must be a reflection of somebody
else’s thought “the pot”, which in turn is a reflection of somebody
else’s thought, etc.), we could consider that the objective thought “the
pot” ultimately amounts to the subjective thought “I am the pot” or “I
am manifest [as] the pot”, just as my objective thought “he/she is
speaking” is in fact a reflection of somebody else’s subjective thought
“I am speaking”. But then, as Abhinavagupta points out, we would have to
admit that all objects are ultimately one and the same thing, namely,
the “I”, and phenomenal variety could not be accounted for. The only way
to escape the infinite regress is therefore to admit that this
phenomenal variety has as its cause the existence of entities that are
external to consciousness. See ĪPVV II: 127: sarva eva
pramātrantaravartina ābhāsāḥ samarpakāḥ prāptā viśeṣābhāvāt.
darpaṇadvaye’pi hy anyonyapratibimbārpaṇe’saṁkhyapratibimbodayaḥ, kim-
aṅga pramātr̥koṭiparārdhānām anyonyapratibimbārpaṇe. tad āhāparyavasānaṁ
syād iti. kiṁ ca samarpakasaṁmato’pi pramātrantaravarty asāv ābhāso
’smadarthaviśrāntivailakṣaṇyenedam iti nirbhāsamānaḥ
pr̥thagbhāvābhimānayogyatvāt pratibimbakalpa iti tasyāpy arpakeṇa
bhāvyam, tatrāpy evam ity anavasthā. tatparihārāya tu paryante ghaṭa
evāsmadarthasaṁbhinnaḥ sakalapramātr̥vyatirikta
ābhāsanasāro’bhyupagantavyo’haṁ ghaṭo bhāsa ity evaṁrūpaḥ. tatrāpi ca
ghaṭatā yadi nādhikā tad ahaṁ ghaṭo ’haṁ paṭa iti nirbhāsamānayor
ghaṭapaṭayor aikyam eva syāt. adhikā cet tatrāpi pratibimbateti
bimbenānyena bhavitavyam ābhāsarūpatāśūnyeneti bāhya evārthaḥ siddhaḥ.
“[In that case] all the manifestations without exception that exist in
the other subjects would as a consequence be projecting [their forms
onto my conscious stream,] since there is no difference [between them
that would prevent some of them from thus projecting their form]. For
even when two mirrors project reflections onto each other, countless
reflections arise – all the more if innumerable subjects project their
reflections onto each other! This is what [the Sautrāntika portrayed by
Utpaladeva] expresses [by saying that] ‘there would be an infinite
number [of manifestations in each of the subjects’]. Moreover, although
this manifestation [of a pot] existing in another subject is considered
as what projects [its reflection onto my consciousness, since it is]
manifest [in the form] ‘this’, [i.e.] as [something] that does not rest
on the first [grammatical] person, it is similar to a reflection, since
it can be associated with the belief that it exists separately [from the
subject, in the form ‘this’ and not in the form ‘I’, and since we are
assuming for the sake of argumentation that all the objective
manifestations in my conscious stream are reflections of a subjective
manifestation in some other conscious stream]. Therefore this
[reflection] too must have [something that produces it by] projecting
[its form, and] that [thing projecting its form too] requires [a third
projecting entity in so far as it must be a reflection as well];
therefore there is an infinite regress. But in order to avoid this
[infinite regress, we] could acknowledge that in the end the pot itself,
which is [apprehended as an object, i.e. as being] distinct from the
first grammatical person [and] separated from all subjects, has as its
essence the [subjective conscious] manifestation which takes such a
form: ‘I am manifest [as] the pot’. And in that case too, if being a pot
is nothing more [than an internal, subjective manifestation,] then the
pot and the cloth, which should be manifest [in the same subjective
form] ‘I am the pot, I am the cloth’ would just be one and the same
[thing]. But if [being a pot] is something more than [an internal aspect
of consciousness,] in that case too [this manifestation] is a
reflection; therefore there must be some other [entity] that is the
reflected object (bimba) [projecting its form onto consciousness and]
that does not consist [in turn] in a [conscious] manifestation [but
rather, is external to it] – therefore the [existence] of the external
object is established.”

60 See ĪPVV II: 127: aparyavasānadoṣaparijihīrṣāṁ parakīyāṁ
śaṁkate’thāpīti. vāsanāprabodhamātre teṣāṁ vyāpāro na
svapratibimbārpaṇe, vāsanā ca ghaṭasahasrair api pūrvaghaṭānubhavajanitā
pratibodhitā tam evaikaṁ pūrvānubhūtaghaṭābhāsam unmeṣayati, tato
nāparyavasānātmābhāsānām atiprasaṅgaḥ. “[With the words] ‘But still’,
[Utpaladeva] states as an objection the opponent’s desire to avoid the
fault of an infinite number [of manifestations in each conscious stream.
Here is what the opponent means:] the activity of the [manifestations
occurring in other conscious streams] only concerns the awakening of
imprints [in my conscious stream, but] not the projection of a
reflection of their own [form into my conscious stream]; and the
imprint, which has been produced by previous experiences of pots, [i.e.]
by innumerable pots, makes this manifestation of a previously
experienced pot arise [and] this [manifestation] only; therefore there
is no absurd consequence [in our position that would] consist in an
infinite number of manifestations.”

7

Utpaladeva’s Proof of God

On the Purpose of the Īśvarasiddhi*

Isabelle Ratié

In his short treatise entitled Īśvarasiddhi (ĪS),1 Utpaladeva claims to
prove the existence of God or the Lord (īśvara)2 understood as an
omnipotent and omniscient creator of the universe. As noted by John
Taber and Helmut Krasser,3 this very goal seems to be at odds with
Utpaladeva’s own statement at the beginning of his magnum opus, the ĪPK,
according to which the Lord can be neither proved nor refuted since it
is always experienced in any conscious individual’s self-awareness.
Several passages scattered in the works of Utpaladeva and his
commentator Abhinavagupta show that this should not be considered as a
blatant contradiction, since according to them, the ĪS was not written
from the ultimate point of view (paramārtha) of non-duality (advaya)4
adopted by Utpaladeva in his Pratyabhijñā works, but from the inferior
point of view of duality, which several scholars have recognized as that
of Nyāya. Nonetheless, these scant and allusive indications leave open a
number of questions: is Utpaladeva’s ĪS an original contribution to the
Indian debate over the existence of God, or does it merely reformulate
arguments put forward earlier? In what way(s) does Utpaladeva’s method
in the ĪS differ from that which he adopts in his ĪPK? And most of all:
why did Utpaladeva take the trouble of writing a treatise that he
himself did not consider as an expression of the ultimate truth?

The Main Argument in the ĪS and Its Naiyāyika Sources

As already noted by several scholars,5 the proof establishing the
existence of the Lord that Utpaladeva defends in the ĪS belongs to the
Nyāya tradition. The argument is an inference “from the fact that [the
universe] is an effect” (kāryatvāt) requiring a cause. More precisely,
this inference is drawn from the fact that the universe is an effect
consisting of a specific arrangement (sanniveśaviśeṣa) that must have
been created by an intelligent agent (buddhimatkartr̥)6 considered as its
efficient cause (nimittakāraṇa), as no material cause (upādānakāraṇa)
can account for this specific arrangement;7 and given the infinite
complexity and internal harmony of the universe, this intelligent agent
must be omniscient and omnipotent — i.e. it is God.8

This famous Nyāya line of argument apparently found its first
formulation in the lost work of Aviddhakarṇa,9 and Uddyotakara, whom
Abhinavagupta explicitly mentions as one of the Naiyāyika authors of the
proof,10 alludes to the inference of īśvara from the fact that some
natural entities are effects11 and defends the thesis that natural
entities endowed with specific arrangements (such as bodies) must have
an efficient cause which, even though imperceptible, can be inferred on
the grounds of their sharing similar features with human artefacts such
as pots, since the latter display a specific arrangement (racanāviśeṣa,
saṁsthānaviśeṣa)12 and have a perceptible efficient cause, i.e. the
potter.13 The same idea was elaborated by later Naiyāyika authors who in
all probability lived before Utpaladeva, such as Śaṅkarasvāmin and
Jayanta Bhaṭṭa, or who may have been younger or older contemporaries,
such as Trilocana, Vācaspatimiśra or Bhāsarvajña.14 As for Utpaladeva’s
contention that the efficient cause of the universe must be not only
omnipotent but also omniscient due to the very nature of its effect, it
can also be traced back to earlier, Vaiśeṣika and Nyāya sources such as
Praśastapāda’s lost Ṭīkā on the Vaiśeṣika-Sūtras15 or Jayanta Bhaṭṭa’s
Nyāyamañjarī,16 and it is also found in Vācaspatimiśra’s Nyāyakaṇikā17
or Udayana’s Ātmatattvaviveka.18

The Mīmāṁsaka and Buddhist Objections

The ĪS defends this inference of īśvara against Mīmāṁsaka and Buddhist
objections. Utpaladeva thus quotes a passage from the ŚV where Kumārila
shows that the example of a specific arrangement on which the proponent
of God’s existence relies (i.e. the pot, which is observed to require
the agency of a potter) is problematic: either the pot is considered as
the product of the potter (but then the example shows that a specific
arrangement is the product of a finite, perishable entity such as a
potter instead of proving God’s agency, so that the reason invoked is
contradictory), or the pot is considered as the product of īśvara (but
then the example actually lacks the property to be proven since nobody
has ever seen God create a pot, and the reason invoked is
inconclusive).19

Utpaladeva also quotes Dharmakīrti,20 who, while apparently building on
Kumārila’s criticism of the proof,21 argues that one can only infer a
particular agent from a particular specific arrangement that has
previously been observed to be causally dependent on this particular
agent — otherwise one could infer that an anthill is the product of a
potter from the mere fact that an anthill is also made of clay.22
According to the Buddhist philosopher, the theist’s inferential reason
is too broad since it appeals to the notion of “specific arrangement” in
general, a notion which rests on a mere “verbal similarity”
(śabdasāmya),23 instead of referring to particular, concrete instances
of specific arrangements.24

Utpaladeva’s Reply to the Mīmāṁsaka and

Buddhist Objections

Utpaladeva salvages the inference from Kumārila’s criticism by
explaining that in fact the inference does not establish any particular
agent (such as a potter or God), but merely shows the necessary
concomitance of any entity possessing a specific arrangement with a
cause conceived of as an intelligent being in general
(buddhimanmātra).25 This means that Kumārila cannot rightly compel his
opponent to face the alternative between the potter and God as
particular causes of a particular arrangement.26 Utpaladeva adds that
nonetheless, this inferred notion of an intelligent being in general is
particularized by its very relationship with the particular effect from
which it is inferred.27 Thus upon seeing smoke over a forest of khadira
trees, we infer the presence there of fire in general, but the general
concept of fire is then legitimately particularized as a special type of
fire (i.e. a khadira fire) because we see that the smoke is located in a
khadira forest, so that the particular substrate (āśraya) of this fire
in general can only be a khadira fire.28 In the same way, in the case of
the inference of īśvara, we infer a cause merely conceived of as an
intelligent being in general, but we are then led to specify this cause
as being God himself due to the specific property of the subject of the
inference (pakṣadharma),29 i.e. due to the specific nature of the effect
that is the universe, since only an omnipotent and omniscient entity
could be the cause of such a complex and harmonious structure.30 And in
the inference of God as well as in the inference of the khadira fire,
the cause is not particularized through any additional means of
knowledge, but through the very inferential mechanism that has first led
us to assume the existence of a cause in general,31 so that the
proponent of īśvara cannot be accused of being unable to prove more than
the fact that the universe has some unspecified cause.32

As for Dharmakīrti’s criticism, Utpaladeva responds to it by saying that
indeed, we infer the existence of a particular intelligent cause (e.g. a
potter) from that of a particular specific arrangement (e.g. a pot) when
we can observe their invariable concomitance, but that the particular
arrangement thus established to be an effect enables us in turn to
establish that other particular arrangements of the same kind (sajātīya)
are also effects of an intelligent cause, just as a particular smoke
that has been established by experience to be an effect of fire enables
us to consider other particular instances of smoke as effects of fire
even though we cannot actually witness the particular fires causing
them.33 Admittedly, the particulars that display a specific arrangement
differ from each other (a pot is neither an anthill nor a cloth, etc.)
in so far as some of the causes contributing to their production are
different, but they are also similar in some respects, i.e. in so far as
they share some causal conditions: a pot is similar to an anthill in so
far as both have the same material cause, namely clay,34 and since the
Buddhists themselves acknowledge the distinction between material and
efficient cause, they must admit these partial similarities.35 Besides,
while denying the reality of universals (jāti), the Buddhists
acknowledge that particulars (svalakṣaṇa) are similar in so far as they
have the same causal efficiency. Now, although we are aware that a pot
and a cloth do not have the same specific arrangement, we make efforts
to use them as tools because we conceptualize these objects as capable
of accomplishing a specific purpose, and we are aware of this purpose
because we are aware that both the pot and the cloth were designed to
this end by an intelligent agent.36 Since such particulars as the pot
and the cloth are capable of producing the same awareness in us in spite
of their differences, in this respect they have the same causal
efficiency, and the Buddhists should accordingly admit their (partial)
similarity.37 Natural composite entities display a specific arrangement
in which each part is arranged in such a way that it helps the other
parts perform their respective functions; and this invariable harmony
(for instance between man and woman) is similar to that found in any
artefact that we have observed to be designed by an intelligent being;
we are therefore entitled to infer that they too were produced by an
intelligent agent.38

The Naiyāyika Sources of Utpaladeva’s Reply

to the Buddhists and Mīmāṁsakas

How original are Utpaladeva’s responses to these antitheistic attacks?
John Taber has noticed that Utpaladeva seems to rely on Jayanta Bhaṭṭa’s
Nyāyamañjarī.39 Indeed, Jayanta replies to Dharmakīrti that in fact God
can be inferred as a cause in general since all inferences involve some
kind of generality: if we clung to the various particularities of the
fire and smoke directly witnessed (e.g. in a kitchen) when first
realizing the invariable concomitance between fire and smoke, we would
be incapable of inferring later the existence of a fire on a hill from
the presence there of a smoke that differs in many respects from the
smoke once seen in the kitchen.40 And according to him, there is no
point in asserting that the general notion of arrangement to which the
theist has recourse is based on a mere verbal similarity (śabdasāmya)
and not on a real one (vastusāmya), since the Buddhists themselves do
not consider such a general notion as “fire” to be real, and yet they
consider that we produce this artificial notion through a process of
exclusion (apoha) of real particulars and that such general notions can
lead to a valid inferential knowledge.41 Jayanta further points out (and
here too, his thought seems to find an echo in the ĪS) that arrangements
are not entirely similar to each other and insists that nonetheless,
they do share a partial similarity in so far as they are all specific
configurations.42 The Naiyāyika also explains that in the inference of
īśvara, one only infers an agent in general, but that this agent is then
particularized as having such specific attributes as omniscience, and
among the ways of determining these particularities he mentions the
property of the subject of the inference (pakṣadharma) to which
Utpaladeva also has recourse while answering Kumārila’s objection, and
he gives an example (the inference of a sandalwood fire) very similar to
that used by Utpaladeva (the inference of a khadira fire).43

In this respect John Taber has noticed that Utpaladeva’s formulation
seems to be an improvement on Jayanta’s. For Jayanta’s explanation seems
to imply that it is the special characteristic of the inferential reason
(hetu) itself that enables the specification of the property to be
established (sādhya): it is because one sees a sandalwood smoke that
looks different from other kinds of smoke that one can infer the
presence of a sandalwood fire; but this explanation is problematic in so
far as it “threatens the general connection between sādhya and hetu (if
sandalwood smoke looks different from other kinds of smoke, how do you
know that it is the effect of fire?)”.44 In contrast, according to
Utpaladeva, the inferential reason is “mere smoke” or “smoke in
general”, and the sādhya’s specification rather “takes place strictly
with reference to the subject (pakṣa) of the inference, as a sort of
afterthought”.45 Nonetheless, as Jayanta himself makes clear, the
argument of the specification through pakṣadharma is no novelty:46 it
was put forward by some earlier Naiyāyika47 and it recurs in other
Naiyāyika works such as those of Vācaspatimiśra48 or Vittoka.49 Besides,
the idea that this specification only comes as an “afterthought” while
not being the product of a second inference, i.e. is only the explicit
development of an implicit necessity involved in the very inferential
process which establishes a cause in general, is a topos of earlier
Nyāya literature.50

The Sāṁkhya Objection

Finally, Utpaladeva presents a lengthy defence of the Naiyāyika
inference against the Sāṁkhya objection that specific designs can in
fact be the result of the sole unconscious primordial nature (prakr̥ti)
or matter (pradhāna).51 He thus answers an objection that was put
forward by Sāṁkhya authors who may not have denied the very existence of
īśvara52 but who none the less set out to refute his agency and argued
that the universe is nothing but the activity of prakr̥ti.53 To the
argument that primordial nature can only be considered as a material
cause (upādāna) and not as the efficient cause (nimitta) that is
precisely the point in debate,54 the Sāṁkhya opponent portrayed by
Utpaladeva replies in turn that primordial nature does not transform
itself randomly, nor for its own sake (svārtha),55 but for the sake of
the pure, passive consciousness that the Sāṁkhya calls puruṣa; and
according to him, the efficient cause of the universe is nothing but
primordial nature’s property of being “for the benefit of the Person”
(puruṣārtha).56

This specific purpose of prakr̥ti explains away the seemingly
pre-established harmony of the universe: 57 primordial nature transforms
itself into the variegated structures that constitute the phenomenal
world so as to fulfil a double purpose for the sake of the puruṣa,
namely, enabling the individual to experience pain and pleasure
according to his merit and demerit, and leading him to liberation
through the discrimination between prakr̥ti and puruṣa.58 Since such a
primordial nature acting for the benefit of the Person is enough to
account for the specific arrangements that constitute the universe,
there is no need to postulate īśvara as their efficient cause.59

Utpaladeva’s Reply to the Sāṁkhya Objection

In response to this objection, Utpaladeva explains first that if the
purposefulness of prakr̥ti were the sole efficient cause of all things
possessing design, a pot would not need a potter: the very fact that its
material cause is for the benefit of individuals would be enough to
produce it.60 But if the Sāṁkhya concedes that in the case of the pot,
the specific arrangement requires a potter, why not assume it in the
case of the universe as well?61 Utpaladeva also points out that a
material cause cannot give rise to a structure specifically designed to
serve a human purpose, because it is unconscious: such a creation
requires a creative desire (cikīrṣā) or will (icchā) as well as a
synthetic awareness (anusaṁdhāna) of what should be done or avoided so
as to obtain a specific effect, and these are not found in material
entities.62 Admittedly, according to the Sāṁkhya, primordial nature,
although unconscious, is capable of knowledge in so far as it transforms
itself into the intellect (buddhi),63 which in turn is capable of desire
or will and synthetic awareness, since it produces determination
(adhyavasāya),64 so that it can know the benefit of the Person.65 But
Utpaladeva argues that determination, will or synthetic knowledge cannot
be manifest before primordial nature starts transforming itself, since
according to the Sāṁkhya, at that time primordial nature is
unmanifest.66And even assuming that matter takes the form of the
intellect in order to manifest them, since buddhi is a material entity,
it needs to be reflected upon by a conscious entity, i.e. a puruṣa,
because will and synthetic awareness are types of awareness.67 But
again, since this manifestation of the intellect and its apprehension by
a conscious entity supposedly constitute the very cause of primordial
nature’s evolution, they must take place before primordial nature has
evolved into an intellect differentiated according to each individual;68
and given that these creative will and synthetic awareness must concern
the whole universe, they can only belong to a special puruṣa
transcending individuality and endowed with omniscience, i.e. īśvara.69

The Naiyāyika Sources of Utpaladeva’s Reply

to the Sāṁkhya Objection

John Taber finds rather strange the length of this discussion with
Sāṁkhya (which spreads over about two thirds of Utpaladeva’s tract),
since according to him, Utpaladeva’s zeal in attacking the Sāṁkhya
position contrasts with the Nyāya’s relative indifference to this
opponent, and since the Sāṁkhya does not seem to have been an
influential school in Utpaladeva’s time.70 However, it is worth noting
that Uddyotakara, the only Naiyāyika author whom Abhinavagupta
explicitly mentions in connection with the demonstration of the
existence of īśvara, devotes an important part of his proof to the
refutation of the Sāṁkhya position. Thus Uddyotakara sets out to show
that primordial nature requires an intelligent controller,71 and he too
attempts to refute the Sāṁkhya thesis that the efficient cause of these
arrangements is nothing but matter’s property of being for the benefit
of the puruṣa.72 He argues (as Utpaladava does later) that there can be
no awareness of objects or of the distinction between primordial nature
and the Person (although this awareness constitutes the puruṣārtha) at
the very moment when matter starts acting, since according to the
Sāṁkhya system, such an awareness can only arise when matter has already
transformed itself into the intellect.73 Uddyotakara also criticizes the
Sāṁkhya contention that matter can act although it is unconscious by
pointing out that this is a dogmatic assertion rather than a
demonstrated fact.74

Nonetheless, John Taber rightly emphasizes that Utpaladeva’s treatment
of the Sāṁkhya objection seems to go “somewhat beyond the measure of
interest in this school among Naiyāyikas”.75 Besides, Uddyotakara’s
arguments often differ from those found in the ĪS in so far as the
former mainly target the Sāṁkhya doctrine of satkāryavāda and the
corollary principle that nothing new can be brought into existence,76
whereas Utpaladeva’s main line of argument against the Sāṁkhya (namely,
the idea that action requires a will and knowledge only found in
conscious entities, and that they cannot be a mere product of the
intellect understood as a material entity) seems to be found only in
embryonic form in the Nyāyavārttika. It does appear in Bhāsarvajña’s
criticism of the Sāṁkhya thesis,77 but Utpaladeva and Bhāsarvajña seem
to have been more or less contemporary, and I am not aware of any clue
that would entitle us to determine which author may have borrowed from
the other. Furthermore, Bhāsarvajña is known to have entertained a view
of the Self heterodox in Nyāya,78 and his refutation of the Sāṁkhya
objection, which involves this peculiar definition of the Self, may not
reflect the orthodox Naiyāyika position.

How Original Is Utpaladeva’s Proof of God?

To sum up, although Utpaladeva’s formulation of the Nyāya proof of
īśvara might have influenced some of the later authors engaging in this
controversy,79 on the whole, the ĪS does not seem to bring anything new
in the debate: it merely reformulates older Naiyāyika arguments.80 The
only exception appears to be Utpaladeva’s treatment of the Sāṁkhya
position. Does this exception constitute a real novelty (perhaps
motivated by Utpaladeva’s desire to refute at length a theory that
leaves no room whatsoever for consciousness in cosmic creation),81 or is
this apparent oddity due (at least to some extent) to the fact that
Utpaladeva is in fact relying on other texts that we have not examined
so far? Before answering this question, let us first inquire into the
meaning that Utpaladeva himself ascribes to the ĪS.

The Inferior Point of View of the Īśvarasiddhi, or

the Difference between Proof (siddhi) and

Recognition (pratyabhijñā)

In the final verse of the ĪS, Utpaladeva explains:

If the Lord shines forth internally [as] the very Self of all living
beings, [as] the agent and knower, only the recognition (pratyabhijñā)
[that] this [Lord is ourselves] is to be performed. And I have explained
elsewhere how it can be brought about; nonetheless, it is [also]
appropriate [to show] that even in duality (dvaita), there is a proof of
the Lord (īśvarasiddhi) – a fire burns brighter in the night.82

Utpaladeva himself considers that in fact no īśvarasiddhi is possible:
the Lord cannot be proved to exist but only “recognized”. The reason for
this is that according to the non-dualistic doctrine propounded by
Utpaladeva in the Pratyabhijñā treatise, nothing exists apart from the
Lord understood as an omnipotent and omniscient consciousness that
playfully manifests itself in the innumerable forms that constitute the
universe, and living beings are nothing but this all-encompassing
consciousness freely choosing to appear as this or that limited
individual. From this perspective, no demonstration of īśvara is
possible, because īśvara is the very Self (ātman) of all living beings,
and because this Self is “always already established” (ādisiddha): 83 no
means of knowledge (pramāṇa) can establish its existence because by
definition, means of knowledge function by bringing about a new
knowledge,84 but any individual is always already aware of the Lord
through the most immediate experience, i.e. self-awareness
(svasaṁvedana).85 Besides, all inferential knowledge is useless when it
comes to īśvara, because īśvara is a pure transcendental subjectivity
that cannot be grasped as an object of knowledge (prameya), whereas
rational discourse is bound to objectify whatever it talks about.86
Nevertheless, because īśvara playfully forgets his own sovereignty while
assuming the role of limited, suffering individuals, these individuals
must be led to recognize themselves as the Lord, and such a recognition
can be brought about by making them aware of their own powers of
knowledge and action, which are precisely those of the Lord. This
recognition, far from producing any new knowledge, merely uncovers or
unveils a knowledge of which the individual was never deprived87 but to
which he no longer pays attention due to some delusion (moha) through
which consciousness hides its very nature from itself.88

Admittedly, Abhinavagupta acknowledges that the Pratyabhijñā treatise
too takes the form of what the Naiyāyikas call an inference for
others.89 Nonetheless this inference, far from resting on “an
inferential reason that is an effect” (kāryahetu) in the manner of the
Naiyāyikas’ kāryatva argument, is based on “an inferential reason that
is a nature” (svabhāvahetu): 90 instead of proving īśvara as the cause
of a universe conceived as an effect distinct from it, it proves that
the individual’s Self is the Lord on the grounds that this Self is
endowed with the very powers ascribed to the Lord. And contrary to a
kāryahetu inference, a svabhāvahetu inference does not produce any new
knowledge, but merely establishes the validity of a usage (vyavahāra).91
In other words, it does not prove the hitherto unestablished fact that
the Lord is the Self: it merely shows that it is legitimate to say that
the Self is the Lord and to behave accordingly, just as showing that an
object seen in front of us is a pot because it possesses the features
that characterize a pot does not make us know the pot (which we already
perceive), but enables us to talk and act in accordance with the fact
that it is a pot.92 And if all inferential knowledge is bound to
objectify the pure subjectivity in which īśvara consists, the
Pratyabhijñā path is paradoxically conceived as a rational path capable
of bringing about recognition because it leads the subject to the very
limit of rationality: in the inference of the Pratyabhijñā treatise, the
nature (svabhāva) that is to be recognized as that of īśvara is
precisely the individual’s experience that he or she cannot be reduced
to a mere object of knowledge, and inducing recognition consists in
letting the individual realize that the aspect of him or her which
resists any attempt of conceptualization, or which “cannot bear to be
grasped as a [mere] object” (idantāvimarśāsahiṣṇu),93 is precisely the
Lord.94

In the Pratyabhijñā treatise, Utpaladeva thus accuses those who
endeavour to prove the existence of God of labouring under a fundamental
misapprehension: they consider that the existence of īśvara requires a
proof because they erroneously apprehend it as a distant, imperceptible
entity that can only be grasped through an inference as the cause of an
effect essentially distinct from it. Thus according to Abhinavagupta’s
commentary, in his lost Vivr̥ti, Utpaladeva was emphasizing that those
who engage in an īśvarasiddhi are driven by the presupposition that
īśvara is imperceptible:

[Utpaladeva] states [the sentence beginning with] “But . . .” [in his
Vivr̥ti] with the intention [of expressing the following objection to his
own thesis]: “The Lord is not the object of a mere means of knowledge
establishing [nothing but] a usage [instead of producing a new
knowledge,] because this [Lord] is not [immediately] manifest in any
way. For the Lord is never manifest anywhere to anybody.” And [with the
compound] siddhasattāka [, this opponent means] that [the Lord’s] very
existence is not established; [since] in this [case], being established
would be being manifest. [And with the words] “It is this very . . .” [,
the opponent means] that this [very] existence must be established. [In
other words, according to the opponent,] with regard to this [existence
of the Lord, we] must state a means of knowledge such that it may lead
to a knowledge consisting in the manifestation of [something] that was
not [manifest] so far; and accordingly, Uddyotakara and [others] have
produced a discourse in the form of a “proof of the Lord”
(īśvarasiddhi).95

Utpaladeva was also emphasizing in his Vivr̥ti ad II.3.17 that this
mistake (assuming that the Lord is not manifest and therefore stands in
need of a proof) is an obstacle particularly difficult to overcome as it
threatens the very possibility of recognition,96 and in his commentary
on I.1.2, Abhinavagupta goes as far as saying that the Naiyāyikas and
Vaiśeṣikas who attempt to prove the existence of īśvara are no better
than the Sāṁkhyas who attempt to refute it: both parties are
fundamentally deluded in so far as they are incapable of paying
attention to their most inner experience, and they both engage in the
equally absurd tasks of proving or refuting the Lord because they
misunderstand their own Self to the point that they no longer recognize
its sentiency.97

According to its own author then, the ĪS expresses an inferior point of
view (which the Pratyabhijñā treatise transcends) because it attempts to
prove the unprovable (or rather, the always already proven) and because
in doing so, it transforms the very core of subjectivity into a mere
object.

But the ĪS’s perspective is also inferior in so far as it presents
īśvara as an efficient cause acting together with other, material and
auxiliary causes that are unconscious and ontologically distinct from
the efficient cause. Thus in the Pratyabhijñā treatise, Utpaladeva and
his commentator Abhinavagupta explain that if the “Naiyāyikas, etc.” are
right to present the Lord as the efficient cause of the universe, they
are wrong to admit other causes distinct from it, because only
consciousness is capable of agency: the ultimate truth (paramārtha) is
rather that the Lord, understood as an all-encompassing consciousness,
is the one and only cause and acts merely by taking on this or that
appearance.98 In the Vivr̥tivimarśinī, Abhinavagupta, after alluding to
the discussion over the legitimacy of inferring īśvara as a cause in
general of the universe, adds that there is no need to explain it
further since it has been dealt with it in detail in the ĪS, but that in
the Pratyabhijñā treatise, Utpaladeva rather gives the ultimate truth
regarding the Lord’s agency — namely, the fact that only īśvara can be
considered a cause:

Although [the Naiyāyikas, etc. acknowledge that] the Lord is a cause,
they admit that other [things] as well, which are distinct from the Lord
[and] insentient, are causes; [but in fact] this [causality] is not
possible for that which does not act deliberately. For [according to the
Naiyāyikas, etc.] what [we] call an “arrangement” consists in the fact
that [various elements] are placed together while being combined [in a
particular way]; it is associated with a material cause [such as] clay
[, and it] enables [us] to distinguish, for instance with regard to a
pot, a plate and a bowl, between [their] being of the same sort [in so
far as they have the same material cause] and their being of a different
sort [in so far as they have different arrangements; and] once [we] have
observed in [only] one occasion [, upon seeing a potter at work,] that
[this arrangement] is produced by [an entity] the nature of which is
conscious, [we] must necessarily conclude that in all cases, [including
the arrangements of worlds and so on,] an arrangement must be, exactly
in the same way, [the effect of a conscious entity]. As for what [some]
say, namely, that although this [invariable co-presence] is observed [in
the particular case of a pot], the understanding that [the universe too]
is the product of a [conscious agent is not correct because this
conscious agent is only inferred as a generality,99 they] say it because
they are deluded by their partiality towards their own view [that the
Lord does not exist]; since [in fact,] in the case of smoke as well, the
[inferred cause is necessarily apprehended as] a general [entity. But]
enough with this digression; for this has been explained in detail by
the author himself in the Īśvarasiddhi, whereas here, it is the ultimate
truth (paramārtha) [that Utpaladeva states], namely: it is the Lord, by
conforming to his own power of necessity (niyatiśakti), who manifests
himself as the sprout in his own limpid self-manifesting consciousness
(svaprakāśa), by making the phenomena of the seed, earth and water
predominant.100

So why did Utpaladeva write a treatise that he himself did not consider
as an expression of the ultimate truth?

A Plausible Purpose for the Īśvarasiddhi:

Utpaladeva’s Inclusivist Strategy Towards Nyāya

John Taber has suggested that Nyāya may have been a step in the
development of Utpaladeva’s thought and that he may have got rid of it
later through the influence of Buddhism in particular.101 However, this
hypothesis would hardly explain why Utpaladeva took the trouble of
writing the ĪS after elaborating his “mature system” (as the last verse
of the treatise clearly indicates); and admittedly, Utpaladeva’s thought
was profoundly influenced by that of Dharmakīrti and his followers,102
but his rejection of Nyāya dualism, as well as his interpretation of
Buddhist concepts, was obviously determined by his belonging to a
pre-existing Śaiva non-dualistic tradition that presented Śiva as a
unique, infinite and dynamic consciousness: it is much more likely that
he chose to reject or retain this or that doctrinal element from both
Nyāya and Buddhism according to their compatibility with the
metaphysical background of his own religious tradition.

However, John Taber also remarks that the ĪS’s last verse seems to
indicate that Utpaladeva “wished to defeat the opponent on his own
turf”103 and he quotes in this respect Abhinavagupta’s assertion that
“the opinion of the author [of the ĪPK] is that in the sphere of māyā,
it is the Naiyāyikas’ method that is ultimately true”.104 The Śaiva
non-dualists acknowledge the validity of the Nyāya point of view at the
ontologically inferior level where consciousness playfully manifests
itself as differentiated, although they consider that from the
perspective of the ultimate truth, i.e. non-duality, this point of view
remains incomplete. The ĪS may thus be understood as one of the outcomes
of an inclusivistic strategy through which Śaiva non-dualism presents
itself as encompassing and transcending all doctrines instead of plainly
rejecting them.105 As Raffaele Torella has emphasized:

In a sense Utpaladeva inaugurates what was to become a salient feature
of the whole Trika in Abhinavagupta’s synthesis: namely, the tendency
not to constitute a monolithic doctrine and a world of religious
experience to oppose en bloc everything that does not coincide with it
[. . .] but to distinguish planes, that are hierarchically ordered but
in which the “higher” does not automatically cancel the “lower” [. . .].
This is the perspective of the paramādvaita, such an elevated viewpoint
that it does not fear what is different from itself, is not put in a
critical position by it, is not forced to make a choice.106

By writing the ĪS, Utpaladeva may thus have meant to show to the
Naiyāyikas (among which “Śaiva faith was known to be pre-eminent”)107
that his Śaivism was not incompatible with their system and that it
sided with Nyāya against the opponents of īśvara, while giving them a
hint that his own system was superior; and indeed, as noted by Raffaele
Torella, the ĪS’s last verse “enables us to see the right
perspective”108 by making clear that duality remains an inferior plane.

Another Aspect of the Issue:

The Śaiva Siddhānta and the Proof of īśvara

However, Utpaladeva is not the first to have integrated the Nyāya proof
of īśvara to his system. It is also the case of the Śaiva Siddhānta, the
dualistic Śaiva religious trend that was dominant in Kashmir in
Utpaladeva’s time.109 Thus the assertion that the Lord, although
imperceptible, can be inferred from the fact that the universe is an
effect, is found in the scriptures of the Śaiva Siddhānta that belong to
the last phase of its early scriptural development (i.e. around the
eighth and ninth centuries ce). The KT110 for instance contains such a
statement and argues that the cause of the universe cannot be past
actions leading to karmic retribution since these are unconscious;111
and the PT112 displays a lengthy defence of the inference of īśvara113
that seems to presuppose an awareness of Kumārila’s antitheistic
critique.114 It addresses a number of objections, most notably that of
the illegitimacy of the inference since it rests on a relation of cause
and effect that cannot be perceived,115 but also that of the possibility
of accounting for the universe’s existence through the sole mechanism of
karmic retribution,116 and it argues that the universe must have an
efficient cause distinct from material and auxiliary causes since all
effects are found to require these three kinds of cause.117 Besides, the
PT states that īśvara is inferred as a mere intelligent cause in
general,118 but that this general cause must nonetheless be
characterized as omniscient since it creates everything.119

Sadyojyotis’s Inference of īśvara and His

Reply to the Buddhist and Mīmāṁsaka Objections

This inference of īśvara from the universe considered as his effect is
also mentioned by various Saiddhāntika exegetes who wrote after
Utpaladeva,120 but of more importance is the fact that it is found as
well in another, non-scriptural Saiddhāntika source that Utpaladeva
certainly knew. Raffaele Torella has noticed that the first chapter of
the NP by Sadyojyotis (an important Saiddhāntika figure who probably
wrote c. 675–725)121 is likely to have influenced the Pratyabhijñā
treatise at least regarding Utpaladeva’s attitude towards Buddhist
epistemology.122 Now, the second chapter of the same work happens to be
entirely devoted to the proof of īśvara,123 and its main line of
argument is “virtually identical to the Nyāya argument for the existence
of God”:124 Sadyojyotis infers the existence of īśvara from the fact
that the universe, which is an effect endowed with parts, must have an
intelligent agent,125 and the whole chapter defends this inference
against various antitheistic attacks also dealt with by Utpaladeva,
among which Dharmakīrti’s objection that one can only infer a particular
agent from a particular effect when their invariable concomitance is
already established through perception.126 Sadyojyotis answers it by
claiming that since the pot on the one hand and natural composite
entities on the other hand are similar at least in so far as they are
effects, the inference is legitimate.127 In his long commentary on this
verse, Rāmakaṇṭha (who may have been influenced in turn by Utpaladeva)
explains that the Buddhists themselves have recourse to the notion of
generality without hypostasizing universals (jāti), and his arguments
sound very similar to Utpaladeva’s.128 Sadyojyotis also argues that if
inference were restricted to particulars that are seen to entertain a
causality relation, it would be useless, since it would be confined to
these singular entities, and it could not establish anything that would
not already be known through perception.129 Furthermore, Sadyojyotis
also addresses Kumārila’s objections130 and it is noteworthy that his
commentator Rāmakaṇṭha has recourse to the pakṣadharma argument131

also found in Utpaladeva’s ĪS.132

Sadyojyotis’s Reply to the Sāṁkhya Objection

But most importantly, just as Utpaladeva in his ĪS, the Saiddhāntikas
seem to ascribe a particular importance to the refutation of the Sāṁkhya
objection:133 Sadyojyotis devotes a large part of the NP chapter on
īśvara to the critical examination of the Sāṁkhya position (an
examination which, as in the ĪS, takes place once the Buddhist and
Mīmāṁsaka objections have been answered).134 Thus according to
Sadyojyotis, “some” object that what is to be established by the
inference is in fact already admitted by the opponents, since the
universe can be accounted for by having recourse to other causes besides
God, among which primordial nature.135 Sadyojyotis answers that it is
not the case, since what is to be established is that the universe is
the effect of a conscious agent,136 and he emphasizes that primordial
nature, which is unconscious, has no independence (svātantrya) and is
therefore incapable of acting by itself.137 The Sāṁkhya opponent replies
by alluding to the SK, according to which unconscious entities too can
act for the benefit of some other entity.138 Sadyojyotis answers (as
Uddyotakara before him)139 that this point remains to be
demonstrated.140 Besides, the qualities of matter do not serve each
other by nature but because they are prompted to act thus by some
conscious agent;141 and since matter starts acting after being inactive,
some conscious entity must prompt it to leave its passive state.142 The
Sāṁkhya objects that “however, knowledge exists within matter”143 since
matter is capable of transforming itself into the intellect.144 Just as
Utpaladeva in the ĪS, Sadyojyotis replies by pointing out that intellect
too is a material, unconscious entity,145 and that even if it is assumed
to exist within primordial nature in some potential state before matter
starts transforming itself, it is not capable of grasping by itself its
own knowledge (since this requires the puruṣa’s consciousness), so that
its so-called effect, determination (adhyavasāya), must in fact be
produced by some other entity that is conscious.146 And the Sāṁkhya
cannot argue that the proponent of the Lord’s existence must admit the
independent action of primordial nature just as he acknowledges that the
Lord is not prompted to act by anything else, since the crucial
difference between primordial nature and the Lord resides in the
latter’s consciousness:147 we observe that contrary to material
entities, people act without being prompted by any external cause, and
admittedly, a person can sometimes prompt another to act, but only
because this person has power over the others; and since the entity
presiding over the universe must be almighty, no other entity can prompt
it to act.148

Utpaladeva’s Īśvarasiddhi as a Message to the Saiddhāntikas

To sum up, although Utpaladeva’s criticism of the Sāṁkhya argument often
seems more refined than Sadyojyotis’, both refutations focus on the idea
that a complex effect can only be the product of a conscious entity, and
that intellect, if conceived as a material entity, cannot account for
the universe. Utpaladeva’s treatise thus seems to emphasize a principle
shared by both dualist and non-dualist Śaivas, namely the idea that only
the conscious is independent (svatantra) and therefore capable of
action, whereas unconscious entities only seem to act in so far as their
actions are always prompted by consciousness.149 Moreover, while
Utpaladeva’s goal when writing the ĪS may have been to show to the
Naiyāyikas that Śaiva non-dualists too are capable of defending īśvara
while using Nyāya concepts, it may also have been, perhaps more
crucially, to show to the Saiddhāntikas that Śaiva non-dualists too can
appropriate the Nyāya inference of the Lord. With the ĪS, Utpaladeva
ostentatiously follows the Saiddhāntikas’ tradition of integrating Nyāya
arguments and thus presents himself as siding with them. This strategy
seems to have been successful at least to a certain extent, since the
Saiddhāntika Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha for instance quotes the ĪS with approval,150
and as seen above, the commentary on Sadyojyotis’s NP by Rāmakaṇṭha (who
was Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha’s own son) sometimes seems to echo Utpaladeva’s
treatise. At the same time, by explaining at the very end of his
treatise that the perspective of duality remains inferior, Utpaladeva is
in all probability alluding to the Śaiva Siddhānta’s dualism at least as
much as he is alluding to the Nyāya’s: if Śaiva non-dualism tends to
include the scriptures of the Śaiva Siddhānta within its own tradition
as a lower form of revelation,151 it also includes as a lower form of
reasoning the philosophical justifications of its dualist counterpart.

Are Saiddhāntika Interlocutors Completely Absent

in the Pratyabhijñā Treatise? The Nature of īśvara’s

Agency and the Analogy with Yogic Creations

In this respect it is worth noting that although Utpaladeva was
obviously much influenced in this Pratyabhijñā treatise by Sadyojyotis’
works,152 one of the most striking features of the ĪPK is that in them,
“the Śaiva Saiddhāntikas virtually disappear, at least as direct
targets”.153 Raffaele Torella has pointed out that openly targetting the
Buddhists rather than the Saiddhāntikas is “a message Utpaladeva
addresses to his dualist cousins, whom [. . .] the Trika does not intend
to defeat, but to use as a basis for its emergence from the dimension of
a restricted circle [. . .]. Choosing Buddhism, and particularly its
logical school, as number one enemy means reinforcing the undeclared
alliance with the Śaivasiddhāntins.”154

However, while openly debating in the Pratyabhijñā treatise with
Buddhist and Brahmanical opponents, Utpaladeva seems to carry on with an
underlying criticism of the Śaiva Siddhānta. This implicit discussion
with fellow Śaivas in the midst of arguments explicitly targetting
non-Śaiva rivals is perceptible for instance in the way Utpaladeva
compares the Lord’s activity of cosmic creation to that of a yogin
creating “by virtue of his will” (icchāvaśāt) and without any material
cause (nirupādānam) various objects of perception that are nothing but
manifestations of his own consciousness.155

This analogy, which is already found in Somānanda’s ŚD,156 can be seen
as an attack on the Naiyāyika and Vaiśeṣika conception of īśvara as an
efficient cause that performs its action out of mere will (icchāmātreṇa,
icchāmātrāt) in so far as this action does not require a body,157 but
that merely gives a specific form to a material cause that remains
ontologically independent from it. And indeed, Abhinavagupta’s
commentaries on the verses in which Utpaladeva presents the analogy seem
to confirm that it is meant at least in part as a criticism of the
Vaiśeṣika representation of cosmic creation: there Abhinavagupta attacks
some opponents who contend that yogins’ creations are merely the result
of their capacity to instantly assemble pre-existing atoms (paramāṇu),
just as, according to the Vaiśeṣikas, God creates the universe by
arranging atoms.158

Nonetheless, the Saiddhāntikas hold a dualistic conception of cosmic
creation somewhat similar to that of the Vaiśeṣikas (although contrary
to the latter they do not identify the material cause of the universe
with atoms but with māyā),159 and the analogy with yogic creations used
by Somānanda and Utpaladeva seems to target the Saiddhāntikas too. Thus
it seems to echo a Saiddhāntika scripture: the KT (which Somānanda
undoubtedly knew)160 asserts that Śiva creates out of mere will, i.e.
without any other instrument (karaṇa), just as a yogin does.161 By
having recourse to the same image, Somānanda hints that his presentation
of īśvara’s agency is in accordance with the depiction of cosmic
activity in the Saiddhāntika scriptures;162 but by the same token, in
contrast he also emphasizes one of his main points of disagreement with
the Saiddhāntikas’ metaphysical doctrine: according to him, the
consciousness presiding over the creation of the universe indeed acts
out of mere will, but in the sense that it does not have recourse to any
kind of matter163 that would exist apart from it. That Utpaladeva in
turn borrows this analogy from the ŚD is worth noting, because in many
ways Utpaladeva’s main treatise diverges from that of his teacher,164
but in this particular respect the two works offer a striking parallel.
And while commenting on the analogy in ĪPK I.5.7, Abhinavagupta takes
the trouble of specifying that māyā is not really the material cause of
the universe, but rather, the power through which the Lord makes what is
insentient appear as if it were the material cause of the universe,165
thus making clear that the analogy is also meant as a criticism of the
Saiddhāntikas’ dualistic view of cosmic creation.

Conclusion: On the Discrete Philosophical Dialogue

Between Śaiva Dualists and Non-dualists

Utpaladeva’s ĪS has so far been interpreted mainly as an attempt to
integrate Nyāya concepts within Śaiva non-dualism as an inferior point
of view transcended by the Pratyabhijñā metaphysics. While this
interpretation is certainly valid, we should bear in mind that the
inference of the Lord defended by Utpaladeva in this short treatise was
integrated to the scriptures of the Śaiva Siddhānta before Utpaladeva
undertook to write the ĪS, and that the Saiddhāntika Sadyojyotis had
already composed in the second chapter of his NP an īśvarasiddhi that
displays many similarities with Utpaladeva’s short treatise as regards
its structure, the choice of its opponents or the strategy employed to
refute them. By writing a text so blatantly at odds with his own
metaphysical principles and so obviously relying on arguments put
forward by earlier authors, Utpaladeva probably meant to include Nyāya
concepts within the scope of his system while presenting them as a lower
perspective; but it is also very likely that he primarily saw these
Naiyāyika arguments as the philosophical justification of the
Saiddhāntikas’ dualist understanding of the relationship between īśvara
and the Self. The ĪS can therefore be read as a message sent to the
Saiddhāntikas and emphasizing Utpaladeva’s philosophical solidarity as a
Śaiva author (but also the capacity of non-dualism to integrate the
conceptual tools already appropriated by the Saiddhāntikas) while
hinting at the inferiority of the Saiddhāntikas’ metaphysics from the
ultimate viewpoint of non-dualism.

This point is of interest in the more general perspective of
Utpaladeva’s relationship with the Śaiva Siddhānta. Modern scholarship
has often emphasized that with the Pratyabhijñā treatise, Utpaladeva
engages in the Brahmanico-Buddhist philosophical debate and relegates at
its background religious issues, most notably by avoiding to have
recourse to the authority of scriptures.166 But Utpaladeva’s attempt to
present the metaphysical tenets of Śaiva non-dualism in the religiously
quasi-neutral discourse of Brahmanico-Buddhist epistemological
controversies should not be interpreted as a sign that Utpaladeva lacked
interest in his Śaiva rivals’ metaphysics, first and foremost because
this attempt had a prestigious precedent in the Śaiva Siddhānta itself:
Sadyojyotis had already departed from mere scriptural exegesis by
writing an independent treatise targetting various Buddhist and
Brahmanical opponents, and in this respect the ĪPK seem to have been
profoundly influenced by the NP’s method and strategies. Besides, while
conspicuously engaging in a dialogue with non-Śaiva authors, Utpaladeva
also sustained an implicit debate with the Saiddhāntikas that, however
discrete, is perceptible for instance in the key passages of the
Pratyabhijñā treatise where īśvara’s cosmic creation is compared to the
creations ascribed to yogins.

It is also likely that Utpaladeva’s works have in turn influenced later
Saiddhāntikas: in his commentary on Sadyojyotis’ demonstration of God,
Rāmakaṇṭha apparently relies on some of the arguments found in the ĪS,
but he also seems to answer Utpaladeva’s criticism of the Saiddhāntika
notion of īśvara. Thus, as seen above, the ĪPKs oppose the idea that
because the Lord is imperceptible, his existence needs to be
inferentially proved, and they reject the very possibility of an
īśvarasiddhi on the grounds that the Lord is “always already
established” (ādisiddha) in so far as the individual subject is always
aware of his being the Lord through mere self-awareness (svasaṁvedana).
Abhinavagupta (who may be relying here, as he so often does, on
Utpaladeva’s lost Vivr̥ti)167 explains in this connection that although
there may be a difference of degree between the individual’s powers of
knowledge and action and those of the Lord, there is no difference of
nature between them, so that the individual’s experience of these powers
is already the very experience of the Lord’s powers.168 In his
introduction to the second chapter of the NP, Rāmakaṇṭha presents a
similar objection: if the individual knows by mere self-awareness his
powers of knowledge and action, what is the point of demonstrating the
Lord’s existence, and why did Sadyojyotis take the trouble of writing a
distinct chapter on the Lord once he had composed the chapter on the
individual subject?169 Rāmakaṇṭha replies that contrary to the
individual Self, the Lord is not known through mere self-awareness
(since the Self of the Lord and that of the individual are distinct) and
remains imperceptible, so that the Lord’s agency in the cosmic creation
must still be proved.170 With this answer, Rāmakaṇṭha seems to continue
the discrete dialogue initiated by Somānanda and Utpaladeva between the
Śaiva Siddhānta and Śaiva non-dualism – a dialogue that remains largely
unexplored, and on which a comparative study of the demonstrations of
the Self by Utpaladeva and Rāmakaṇṭha for instance171 could certainly
shed some light.

* This article was written thanks to the generous financial help of the
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, as part of project FR 2531/3-1 (“Eine
Untersuchung zur Kausalität im Pratyabhijñā-System. Kritische Edition,
Übersetzung und Studie von Abhinavagupta’s ĪPV, Adhikāra II, Āhnika 4”).
I am very grateful to Vincent Eltschinger, John Taber and Albrecht
Wezler, who carefully read the first version of this paper and whose
many remarks were very helpful, and to Yasutaka Muroya, who kindly
answered my questions on the chronology of Naiyāyika authors. Mistakes
are mine.

References

Primary literature

ĀḌ = [Āgamaḍambara] Much Ado about Religion by Bhaṭṭa Jayanta, ed. and
tr. C. Dezso, New York: University Press / JJC Foundation, 2005.

ĀTV = The Ātmatattvaviveka of Śrī Udayanācārya with the Commentary of
Śrī Nārāyaṇācārya Ātreya and the Dīdhiti Commentary of Śrī Raghunātha
Śiromani, with Bauddhādhikāra Vivr̥ti of Śrī Gadādhara Bhaṭṭācārya, ed.
D. Śāstrī, Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series 84, Benares: 1940.

Bhāskarī = Īśvarapratyabhijñāvimarśinī of Abhinavagupta, Doctrine of
Divine Recognition, vols. I & II: Sanskrit Text with the Commentary
Bhāskarī, ed. K.A.S. Iyer and K.C. Pandey (Allahabad, 1938, 1950),
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1986.

GB = [Gauḍapādabhāṣya] The Sāṁkhya-kārikā. Īśvara Kr̥ṣṇa’s Memorable
Verses on Sāṁkhya Philosophy with the Commentary of Gauḍapādācārya, ed.
H.D. Sharma, Poona Oriental Series 9, Poona: Oriental Book Agency, 1933.

ĪPK = Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Kārikā of Utpaladeva with the Author’s Vr̥tti,
ed. and tr. R. Torella, [Roma, 1994], Corrected Edition, Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass, 2002.

ĪPV = Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vimarśinī, ed. M.R. Śāstrī/M. K. Śāstrī, KSTS
22 & 33, Srinagar: Nirnaya Sagar Press, 2 vols., 1918-21.

ĪPVV = Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vivr̥ti-Vimarśinī by Abhinavagupta, ed. M.K.
Śāstrī, KSTS 60, 62 & 65, Bombay: Nirnaya Sagar Press, 3 vols., 1938-43.

ĪS = [Īśvarasiddhi, in] Siddhitrayī and Pratyabhijñā-kārikā-vr̥tti of
Rājānaka Utpaladeva, ed. M.K. Śāstrī, KSTS 34, Srinagar: 1921.

ĪV = [Īśvaravāda, in] Jñānaśrīmitranibandhāvalī (Buddhist Philosophical
Works of Jñānaśrīmitra), ed. A. Thakur, Tibetan Sanskrit Work Series 5,
Patna: 1987.

JM = [Jayamaṅgalā]. See SK.

KT = [Kiraṇatantra] Bhaṭṭarāmakaṇṭhaviracitā kiraṇavr̥ttiḥ, Bhaṭṭa
Rāmakaṇṭha’s Commentary on the Kiraṇatantra, vol. I, chaps. 1-6, ed. and
tr. D. Goodall, Pondicherry: Institut Français de Pondichéry / École
Française d’Extrême-Orient, 1998.

KV = [Kiraṇavr̥tti]. See KT.

MT = The Śrī Mr̥gendra Tantram (Vidyāpāda and Yogapāda) with the
Commentary of Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha, ed. M.K. Śāstrī, KSTS 50, Bombay: 1930.

MTṬ = [Mr̥gendratantraṭīkā]. See MT.

MV = [Māṭharavr̥tti]. See SK.

NBhūṣ = Śrīmadācārya-Bhāsarvajña-praṇītasya Nyāyasārasya svopajñaṁ
vyākhyānaṁ Nyāyabhūṣaṇam, ed. Svāmī Yogīndrānanda, Varanasi: Ṣaḍdarśan
Prakāśan Pratiṣṭhānam, 1968.

NK = [Nyāyakandalī]. See PDhS.

NKaṇ = [Nyāyakaṇikā] Vidhiviveka of Śrī Maṇḍana Miśra, with the
Commentary Nyāyakaṇikā of Vācaspati Miśra, ed. L. Goswami, Prācyabhāratī
Series 8, Varanasi: 1978.

NMĪS = [Nyāyamañjarī, Īśvarasiddhi section]. See Kataoka 2005.

NP = Nareśvaraparīkṣā of Sadyojyotiḥ with commentary by Rāmakaṇṭha, ed.
M.K. Śāstrī, KSTS 45, Srinagar: Kashmir Pratap Steam Press, 1926.

NPP = [Nareśvaraparīkṣāprakāśa]. See NP.

NS = [Nyāyasūtra]. See NV.

NTṬ = Nyāyavārttikatātparyaṭīkā of Vācaspatimiśra, Nyāyacatur-granthikā,
vol. III, ed. A. Thakur, New Delhi: Indian Council of Philosophical
Research, 1996.

NV = Nyāyabhāṣyavārttika of Bhāradvāja Uddyotakara, Nyāyacaturgranthikā,
vol. II, ed. A. Thakur, New Delhi: Indian Council of Philosophical
Research, 1997.

NVC = [Nyāyavārttika (Calcutta edition) in] Gautama’s Nyāyasūtras with
Vātsyāyana’s Bhāṣya, Uddyotakara’s Vārttika, Vācaspati Miśra’s
Tātparyaṭīkā and Viśvanātha’s Vr̥tti, ed. A. and H. Tarkatirtha,
Calcutta: 1944.

PDhS = [Padārthadharmasaṅgraha] Praśastapāda Bhāṣya
(Padārthadharmasaṅgraha) with Commentary Nyāyakandalī of Śrīdhara, ed.
V.P. Dvivedin (Banaras, 1895), Delhi: Sri Satguru Publications, 1984.

PT = The Parākhyatantra: A Scripture of the Śaiva Siddhānta, ed. and tr.
D. Goodall, Collection Indologie 98, Pondicherry: Institut Français de
Pondichéry/École Française d’Extrême-Orient, 2004.

PV = Pramāṇavārttika-Kārikā (Sanskrit and Tibetan), ed. Y. Miyasaka,
Acta Indologica 2, 1971-72, pp. 1-206.

ŚD = Śivadr̥ṣṭi of Śrīsomānandanātha with the Vr̥tti by Utpaladeva, ed.
M.K. Śāstrī, KSTS 54, Srinagar: 1934.

ŚDV = [Śivadr̥ṣṭivr̥tti]. See ŚD.

SK = Sāṁkhya-Kārikā of Śrīmad Īśvarakr̥ṣṇa with the Māṭharavr̥tti of
Māṭharācārya, ed. V.P. Sarma, and the Jayamaṅgalā of Śrī Śaṅkara, ed. S.
Vangiya, Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series 296, Varanasi: 1970.

ŚV = Ślokavārttika of Śrī Kumārila Bhaṭṭa, with the Commentary
Nyāyaratnākara of Śrī Pārthasārathi Miśra, ed. D. Sastri, Varanasi: Tara
Publications, 1978.

TK = Vācaspatimiśra’s Tattvakaumudī, ein Beitrag zur Textkritik bei
kontaminierter Überlieferung von S.A. Srinivasan, Alt- und Neu-Indische
Studien 12, Hamburg: De Gruyter and Co., 1967.

TSPK = [Tattvasaṁgrahapañjikā, Krishnamacharya edition] Tattvasaṁgraha
of Śāntarakṣita with the Commentary ‘Pañjikā’ of Kamalaśīla, ed. E.
Krishnamacharya, 2 vols., Baroda: Oriental Institute, 1984.

TSPS= [Tattvasaṁgrahapañjikā, Shastri edition] Tattvasaṁgraha of Ācārya
Śānta­rakṣita with the Commentary ‘Pañjikā’ of Kamalśīla, ed. D.
Shastri, 2 vols., Bauddha Bha­ra­ti Series 1, Varanasi: Bauddha Bharati,
1981.

TSṬ = [Tattvasaṁgrahaṭīkā]. See Filliozat 1988.

TTNV = [Tattvatrayanirṇayavr̥tti]. See Filliozat 1991.

Vr̥tti = Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikāvr̥tti]. See ĪPK.

[Vyomavatī] The Praśastapādabhāṣyam by Praśasta Devācārya, with
Commentaries Sūktī, Setu and Vyomavatī, ed. G. Kaviraj, Chowkhambha
Sanskrit Series 61, Benares: 1930.

YBh = [Yogabhāṣya]
Vācaspatimiśraviracitaṭīkāsametaśrīvyāsa-bhāṣyasametāni
Pātañjalayogasūtrāṇi, āśramasya paṇḍitaiḥ saṁśodhitam,
Ānandāśramasaṁsktagranthāvaliḥ 47, Pune: [1904], 1978.

YD = Yuktidīpikā. The Most Significant Commentary on the Sāṁkhyakārikā,
ed. A. Wezler and S. Motegi, vol. I, Alt- und Neu-Indische Studien 44,
Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag, 1998.

Secondary literature

Acharya, D., 2006, Vācaspatimiśra’s Tattvasamīkṣā: The Earliest
Commentary on Maṇḍanamiśra’s Brahmasiddhi, critically edited with an
introduction and notes, Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag.

Alper, P., 1979, “Śiva and the Ubiquity of Consciousness: The
Spaciousness of an Artful Yogi”, Journal of Indian Philosophy, 7:
345-407.

Bronkhorst, J., 1983, “God in Sāṁkhya”, Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde
Südasiens und Archiv für indische Philosophie, 27: 149-64.

———, 1996a, “God’s Arrival in the Vaiśeṣika System”, Journal of Indian
Philosophy, 24: 281-94.

———, 1996b, “The Self as Agent: A Review Article”, Asiatische Studien /
Études Asiatiques, 50(3): 603-21.

Chemparathy, G., 1965, “The Testimony of the Yuktidīpikā Concerning the
īśvara Doctrine of the Pāśupatas and Vaiśeṣikas”, Wiener Zeitschrift für
die Kunde Sudasiens, 9: 119-46.

———, 1968, “The Īśvara Doctrine of Praśastapāda”, Vishveshvaranand
Indological Journal, 1968 [1969] 6: 65-87.

———, 1970, “Praśastapāda and His Other Names”, Indo-Iranian Journal,
12(4): 241-54.

———, 1972, An Indian Rational Theology. Introduction to Udayana’s
Nyāyakusumāñjali, de Nobili Research Library 1, Vienna.

Dyczkowski, M.S.G., 1987, The Doctrine of Vibration: An Analysis of the
Doctrines and Practices of Kashmir Shaivism [SUNY Press, New York,
1987], Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2006.

———, 1992, The Stanzas on Vibration: The Spandakārikā with Four
Commentaries: The Spandasaṁdoha by Kṣemarāja, the Spanda-Vr̥tti by
Kallaṭabhaṭṭa, the Spandavivr̥ti by Rājānaka Rāma, the Spandapra-dīpikā
by Bhagavadutpala, Translated with an Introduction and Exposition [SUNY
Press, New York, 1992], Varanasi: Dilip Kumar Publishers, 1994.

Eltschinger, V. and I. Ratié, 2013, Self, No-Self, and Salvation.
Dharmakīrti’s Critique of the Notions of Self and Person, Wien: Verlag
der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.

Filliozat, P.-S., 1988, “Le Tattvasaṁgraha,‘Compendium des essences’, de
Sadyojyoti”, Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extrême-Orient, 77(1):
97-163.

———, 1991, “Le Tattvanirṇaya: ‘La Détermination des trois essences’ de
Sadyojyoti avec le commentaire d’Aghoraśivācārya”, Bulletin de l’École
Française d’Extrême-Orient, 78(1): 133-58.

Frauwallner, E., 1962, Aus der Philosophie der śivaitischen Systeme,
Deutsche Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin, Vorträge und Schriften
78, Berlin: Akademie-Verlag.

Goodall, D., 1998. See KT.

———, 2001, “The Saiddhāntika Parākhyatantra, Its Account of Language,
and the Interpolation of the Eighth Chapter of the Published
Pauṣkarāgama”, in R. Torella (ed.) Le Parole e i marmi. Studi in onore
di Raniero Gnoli nel suo 50° compleanno, Serie Orientale Roma 92, Rome:
Istituto Italiano per l’Africa e l’Oriente, pp. 327-50.

———, 2004. See PT.

Hanneder, J., 1998, Abhinavagupta’s Philosophy of Revelation. An Edition
and Annotated Translation of Mālinīślokavārttika I, 1-399, Groningen
Oriental Studies 14, Groningen: Egbert Forsten.

Hannotte, L., 1987, Philosophy of God in Kashmir Śaiva Dualism:
Sadyojyoti and His Commentators, unpublished dissertation, McMaster
University, Hamilton (Ontario).

Hulin, M., 1980, Mr̥gendrāgama, Sections de la doctrine et du yoga, avec
la Vr̥tti de Bhaṭṭanārāyaṇakaṇṭha et la Dīpikā d’Aghoraśivācārya,
Publications de l’Institut Français d’Indologie 63, Pondicherry.

Jackson, R., 1986, “Dharmakīrti’s Refutation of Theism”, Philosophy East
and West, 36(4): 315-48.

Kataoka, K., 2003, “The Mīmāṁsā Definition of pramāṇa as a Source of New
Information”, Journal of Indian Philosophy, 31: 89-103.

———, 2005, “Critical Edition of the Īśvarasiddhi Section of Bhaṭṭa
Jayanta’s Nyāyamañjarī”, Memoirs of the Institute of Oriental Culture
(University of Tokyo), 148: 57-110.

Krasser, H., 1999, “Dharmakīrti’s and Kumārila’s Refutations of the
Existence of God: A Consideration of Their Chronological Order”, in S.
Katsura (ed.) Dharmakīrti’s Thought and Its Impact on Indian and Tibetan
Philosophy: Proceedings of the Third International Dharmakīrti
Conference, Hiroshima, November 4-6, 1997, Wien: Verlag der
Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, pp. 215-24.

———, 2001, “On Dharmakīrti’s Understanding of pramāṇabhūta and His
Definition of pramāṇa”, Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens, 45:
173-99.

———, 2002, Śaṅkaranandanas Īśvarāpākaraṇasaṅkṣepa, Teil 2: Annotierte
Übersetzungen und Studie zur Auseinandersetzung über die Existenz
Gottes, Wien: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.

Lawrence, D.P., 2000, Rediscovering God with Transcendental Argument: A
Contemporary Interpretation of Monistic Kashmiri Śaiva Philosophy,
Delhi: Sri Satguru Publications [State University of New York, 1999].

Muroya, Y., 2011, “Bhāsarvajña’s Interpretation of bhāva eva nāśaḥ and a
Related Chronological Problem”, in H. Krasser, H. Lasic, E. Franco and
B. Kellner (eds.) Religion and Logic in Buddhist Philosophical Analysis:
Proceedings of the Fourth International Dharmakīrti Conference, Vienna,
August 23-27, 2005, Wien: Verlag der österreichischen Akademie der
Wissenschaften, pp. 341-61.

Nemec, J., 2011, The Ubiquitous Śiva: Somānanda’s Śivadr̥ṣṭi and His
Tantric Interlocutors, Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press.

Oberhammer, G., 1965, “Zum Problem des Gottesbeweises in der indischen
Philosophie”, Numen, 12: 1-34.

Ratié, I., 2006, “La Mémoire et le Soi dans l’
Īśvarapratyabhijñāvimarśinī d’Abhinavagupta”, Indo-Iranian Journal,
49(1-2): 39-103.

———, 2007, “Otherness in the Pratyabhijñā Philosophy”, Journal of Indian
Philosophy, 35(4): 313-70.

———, 2009, “Remarks on Compassion and Altruism in the Pratyabhijñā
Philosophy”, Journal of Indian Philosophy, 37(4): 349-66.

———, 2010, “The Dreamer and the Yogin: On the Relationship between
Buddhist and Śaiva Idealisms”, Bulletin of the School of Oriental and
African Studies, 73(3): 437-78.

———, 2011a, Le Soi et l’Autre. Identité, différence et altérité dans la
philosophie de la Pratyabhijñā, Leiden-Boston: Brill.

———, 2011b, “Can One Prove that Something Exists Beyond Consciousness? A
Śaiva Criticism of the Sautrāntika Inference of External Objects”,
Journal of Indian Philosophy, 39(4-5): 479-501.

———, 2013, “On Reason and Scripture in the Pratyabhijñā”, in V.
Eltschinger and H. Krasser (eds.) Scriptural Authority, Reason and
Action: Proceedings of a Panel at the 14th World Sanskrit Conference,
Kyoto, Sept. 1-5 2009, Wien: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der
Wissenschaften, pp. 375-453.

Sanderson, A., 1985, “Purity and Power among the Brahmans of Kashmir”,
in M. Carithers, S. Collins and S. Lukes (eds.) The Category of the
Person: Anthropology, Philosophy, History, Cambridge (MA): Cambridge
University Press, pp. 190-216.

———, 1988, “Śaivism and the Tantric Tradition”, in S. Sutherland (ed.)
The World’s Religions, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, pp. 660-704.

———, 1995, “Meaning in Tantric Ritual”, in A.M. Blondeau and K. Schipper
(eds.) Essais sur le rituel III. Colloque du centenaire de la section
des Sciences religieuses de l’École Pratique des Hautes Études,
Bibliothèque de l’École des Hautes Études 102, Louvain-Paris: Peeters,
pp. 15-96.

———, 2006, “The Date of Sadyojyotis and Br̥haspati”, Cracow Indological
Studies, 8: 39-91.

———, 2007, “The Śaiva Exegesis of Kashmir”, in D. Goodall and A. Padoux
(eds.) Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d’Hélène Brunner, Collection
Indologie 106, Pondicherry: Institut Français de Pondichéry/École
Française d’Extrême-Orient, pp. 231-442.

Slaje, W., 1986, “Untersuchungen zur Chronologie einiger
Nyāya-Philosophen”, Studien zur Indologie und Iranistik, 11-12: 245-78.

Taber, J., 1986, “Utpaladeva’s Īśvarasiddhi”, The Adyar Library
Bulletin, Golden Jubilee Volume, 52: 106-37.

Torella, R., 1992, “The Pratyabhijñā and the Logical-Epistemological
School of Buddhism”, in T. Goudriaan (ed.) Ritual and Speculation in
Early Tantrism: Studies in Honor of André Padoux, SUNY Series in Tantric
Studies, Albany: State University of New York Press, pp. 327-45.

———, 1999, “Sāṁkhya as Sāmānyaśāstra”, Asiatische Studien/Études
Asiatiques, 53: 553-62.

———, 1994. See ĪPK.

———, 2007, “Studies on Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-vivr̥ti. Part IV:
Light of the Subject, Light of the Object”, in B. Kellner et al. (eds.)
Pramāṇakīrtiḥ: Papers Dedicated to Ernst Steinkellner on the Occasion of
His 70th Birthday, Wiener Studien zur Tibetologie und Buddhismuskunde
70.2, Wien: Arbeitskreis für tibetische und buddhistische Studien
Universität Wien, pp. 925-40.

———, 2008, “From an Adversary to the Main Ally: The Place of Bhartr̥hari
in the Kashmirian Shaiva Advaita”, in M. Kaul and A. Aklujkar (eds.) The
Grammatical Traditions of Kashmir: Essays in Memory of Pandit Dinanath
Yaksh, Delhi: D.K. Printworld, pp. 508-24.

Vattanky, J., 1984, Gaṅgeśa’s Philosophy of God, Madras: The Adyar
Libary and Research Centre.

Watson, A., 2006, The Self’s Awareness of Itself. Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha’s
Arguments against the Buddhist Doctrine of No-self, Wien: De Nobili.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Although the fifty-six stanzas of the ĪS and the Vr̥tti thereon have
aroused little scholarly interest so far, two important studies must be
mentioned in this respect: Taber 1986, which summarizes the whole
treatise and offers a very insightful philosophical analysis of it; and
Krasser 2002, an excellent study of the Indian controversy over the
existence of God that contains (pp. 149-58) a translation and analysis
of some key passages in the ĪS.

2 In the context of the proof of īśvara, the term “God” might seem most
appropriate to the Western reader. Nonetheless I have kept the more
literal term “Lord” in the translations at least, because īśvara
designates first and foremost a person who has power or reigns over
something (see, for example, ĪPVV III: 181-82: yatra yad āyattaṁ sa
tatreśvaro rājeva nije rājye . . . “That on which something depends is
the Lord of this [thing], as a king [who is the Lord] of his kingdom . .
.”), and the various Indian authors quoted below often use the term in
this sense (for an example of this use by Praśastapāda, see Chemparathy
1968: 84; cf. e.g. Rāmakaṇṭha’s assertion that the potter is īśvara with
respect to the pot in KV, p. 73).

3 See Taber 1986: 106-07; Krasser 2002: 149-50.

4 Abhinavagupta repeatedly calls the supporters of Utpaladeva’s doctrine
the “proponents of the non-duality with the Lord” (īśvarādvayavādin):
see e.g. ĪPVV II: 122 or 129 (quoted in Ratié 2011a: 385, n 44 and
598-99, n 64). This non-duality is primarily to be understood as the
identity of the individual’s Self (ātman) with the Lord, but also as the
absolute ontological dependence of the phenomenal world on īśvara
conceived as an all-encompassing consciousness that creates the universe
merely by taking on its various forms.

5 See e.g. Taber 1986: 107; Torella 1994: 40; Krasser 2002: 151ff.

6 ĪS: 1: tanukaraṇādikāryaṁ buddhimatkartr̥pūrvakaṁ
sanniveśa-viśeṣavattvāt, yad yat sanniveśaviśeṣavat tat tad
buddhimatkartr̥nirmitaṁ yathā ghaṭaḥ, buddhimatkartr̥pūrvakaṁ yan na
bhavati na tat sanniveśaviśeṣavatkāryaṁ yathā paramāṇvākāśaśaśaviṣāṇādi,
tathā ca bhavati sanniveśaviśeṣavat tanvādikāryam, tasmād
buddhimatkartr̥pūrvakam iti. “An effect such as bodies, organs and so on
presupposes an intelligent agent (buddhimatkartr̥), because it possesses
a specific arrangement (sanniveśaviśeṣa). Whatever has a specific
arrangement was created by an intelligent agent – a pot for instance
[was created by a potter; whereas] that which does not presuppose an
intelligent agent is not an effect endowed with a specific arrangement –
for instance, atoms, space, [non-existing things such as] a rabbit’s
horn, etc. And thus, there is an effect [consisting of] bodies, etc.,
[namely, the universe], which possesses a specific arrangement;
therefore it presupposes an intelligent agent.” See Krasser 2002:
150-51.

7 ĪS: 4 : tathā hi śarīre tāvad upādānakāraṇaṁ śukraśoṇitādi siddham. na
cāsya tatsanniveśayogaḥ. cakṣuḥśrotrapāṇipādāder api tad evopādānam
atatsanniveśi, bhuvanānām api pārthivādyartharacanātmakānāṁ
mr̥dādyupādānam atatsanniveśy eva siddham, nātra kiṁcid durupapādam.
lokayātrātrāṇahetutāpi śarīrādeḥ sarvavādisiddhaiva pratyakṣata eva.
nātrāsthāne vistaropanyāsaḥ saphalaḥ. tataḥ siddha eva hetuḥ. “To
explain: in a body, to begin with, the material cause, such as sperm and
blood, is established. Now, this [material cause itself] is not endowed
with the arrangement [that the body displays]. [Organs] too, such as the
eye, ear, hand, foot and so on, have the same material cause which does
not possess this arrangement. [And] worlds too, which consist of
arrangements of things such as earth and so on, are established to
possess a material cause such as earth which is absolutely devoid of
this arrangement — in this regard there is nothing hard to demonstrate.
And for all those participating in the debate, it is a [fact]
established through mere perception that these bodies, etc. are causes
that ensure the pursuit of worldly affairs: a long demonstration would
be vain here at [such] an improper place. Therefore the reason [for
inferring the Lord] is indeed established.”

8 ĪS: 4-5: īśvarasiddhiparyavasānaś cāyaṁ sādhanārthaḥ. tanvādiṣu hi
viśvāparaparyāyeṣu parasparānuguṇeṣu sarveṣu yāvaj jñānaṁ nāsti tāvat
kathaṁ nirmitsā syād iti sarvajñatā tāvat sthitā, tathānirmāṇasāmarthyāc
cānekatve pramāṇābhāvāc caikasya sarvakartr̥tvam iti
dharmiviśeṣasambandhaucityād īśvara eva buddhimān paryavasyati. “And
this point of the demonstration amounts to proving [the existence of]
the Lord; for if [this inferred cause] had no knowledge of the bodies
and so on, which are another expression for the [entire] universe and
are all mutually adapted, how could [it] have any desire to create
[them]? Therefore, first of all, the omniscience [of their creator] is
established; and both because [only an omnipotent agent] is capable of
such a creation and because there is no argument [proving] that there
may be several [agents of the universe], the omnipotence of a single
[agent is established too]. Therefore [this inferred] intelligent
[agent] can only be the Lord Himself, because [the Lord only] can have a
relationship with the particular subject of the inference (dharmiviśeṣa)
[, i.e. the effect that is the entire universe].”

9 See the fragment preserved in the TSP and mentioned as “put forward by
Aviddhakarṇa” (aviddhakarṇopanyasta) in TSPS: 52: dvīndriyagrāhyāgrāhyaṁ
vimatyadhikaraṇabhāvāpannaṁ buddhimatkāraṇapūrvakam,
svārambhakāvayavasanniveśaviśiṣṭatvād ghaṭādivad vaidharmyeṇa paramāṇava
iti. “That which is either apprehended through two [different]
sense-organs or not apprehended [by any sense-organ, and] which is the
object of the debate, presupposes an intelligent cause, because it is
particularized by an arrangement (sanniveśaviśiṣṭa) of the parts that
cling together [so as to constitute this entity] itself, just as a pot;
the atoms [stand] as a dissimilar example.” Cf. e.g. Vattanky 1984: 17;
Krasser 1999: 216; 2002: 35-36, n 39 and p. 151. The reason why
Aviddhakarṇa mentions that “which is the object of the debate” is
probably that both parties (i.e. the proponents of theism a well as its
opponents) acknowledge that human artefacts are created by a conscious
agent and that uncomposed natural entities such as atoms are not,
whereas they disagree on whether composite natural entities such as
bodies are products of an intelligent agent. See NTṬ: 563: trayo hi
khalu bhāvā jagati bhavanti. prasiddhacetanakartr̥kāś ca yathā
prāsādāṭṭālagopuratoraṇādayaḥ, prasiddhatadviparyayāś ca yathā
paramāṇvākāśādayaḥ, sandigdhacetanakartr̥kāś ca yathā
tanutarumahīmahīdharādayaḥ. “For indeed, there are three [kinds of]
entities in this world: [those] that are well known as having a
conscious creator, such as palaces, watchtowers, gates, arches and so
on; [those] that are well known as not [having such a conscious
creator], such as atoms, space and so on; and [those] about which one
doubts whether they have a conscious creator, such as bodies, trees,
earth, mountains and so on.”

10 ĪPVV I: 40, quoted below, n 95.

11 Note that in his commentary on NS IV.1.21, Uddyotakara does not use
the inferential reason “because it is an effect” (kāryatvāt) to prove
that the universe has īśvara as its efficient cause: rather, he has
recourse to the inferential reason “because it is unconscious”
(acetanatvāt) that he applies to matter, atoms and actions leading to
karmic retribution (see below, n 71). Nonetheless, at the end of his
lengthy commentary on this sūtra, he mentions Aviddhakarṇa’s argument
while trying to show that in fact the kāryatvāt argument formulated by
his predecessor amounts to the one resting on the acetanatvāt
inferential reason. See NV ad NS IV.1.21: 441: evaṁ kāryatvāt tr̥ṇādīni
pakṣīkr̥tya darśanasparśanaviṣayatvād iti vaktavyam. evaṁ yatra yatra
vipratipattiḥ kāryatvaṁ ca tat tad* anenaiva nyāyenānena dr̥ṣṭāntena
vāsyādinā pakṣayitvā sādhayitavyam iti. [*ca tat tad NVC: 957: ca yat,
tad NV] “In the same way, when one takes grass and so on as the subject
of the inference since [they] are effects [and] objects of vision and
touch, one can say [that they are controlled by an intelligent agent].
[That is to say,] in the same way, when one takes as the subject of the
inference whatever is the object of the debate and involves [the
property of] being an effect, one can establish [that this object has
the property of being controlled by an intelligent agent] through the
same reasoning [, i.e. because of its being unconscious, by having
recourse] to the example of the axe and so on, [which are unconscious
entities requiring the control of an intelligent agent].” On the
probable meaning of “whatever is the object of the debate” here, see
above, n 9.

12 As noted by H. Krasser, in his refutation of this proof Dharmakīrti
uses the compound saṁsthānaviśeṣa found in the NV rather than
sanniveśa-viśeṣa, which appears in Aviddhakarṇa’s fragment (see Krasser
1999: 216, n 7; 2002: 36, n 39; cf. below, n 32).

13 See NV ad NS IV.1.22, where Uddyotakara answers the objection
according to which “just as a thorn’s sharpness for instance is devoid
of efficient cause and [yet] endowed with a material cause, in the same
way, in the case of the production of a body, etc., [there is no such
thing as an efficient cause]” (yathā kaṇṭakasya taikṣṇyādi nirnimittaṁ
copādānavac ca, tathā śarīrādisarge ’pīti, NV: 441-42). Uddyotakara
explains (NV: 442): kaḥ punar atra nyāyaḥ, animittaracanāviśeṣāḥ
śarīrādayaḥ saṁsthānaviśeṣavattvāt kaṇṭakādivad iti. na,
anupalabhyamānanimittānām anumānato nimittopalabdheḥ. yasya nimittaṁ
pratyakṣato nopalabhyate, tasyānumānato nimittaṁ pratyetavyam. kutaḥ –
nimittavaddravyasāmānyāt. yāni khalu nimittavanti dravyāṇi
saṁsthānaviśeṣavanti tāni ghaṭādīni. saṁsthānaviśeṣavac ca śarīraṁ
kaṇṭakādayaś ca. tasmāt te ’pi nimittavanta iti. “But what is the
reasoning [in the objection] here? [Answer:] the body and so on have
specific arrangements that are devoid of efficient cause, because, just
as a thorn for instance [that has no efficient cause,] they have a
specific arrangement. [We answer the objection in the following way:]
This is not [true], because the efficient cause of things whose
efficient cause is not [directly] perceived can [still] be apprehended
through inference: that whose efficient cause is not directly perceived
has an efficient cause that can be acknowledged through inference. How?
Because of its sharing a common feature (sāmānya) with [perceptible]
substances that possess an efficient cause. Indeed, the substances that
have a [perceptible] efficient cause possess a specific arrangement,
pots for instance; and a body possesses a specific arrangement, and [so
do] thorns and so on. Therefore they too have an efficient cause.”

14 On the presentation of the inference of īśvara by these authors, see
Krasser 2002: 56-126. On the vexed question of relative chronology as
regards Naiyāyika authors for the period covering the ninth to eleventh
centuries, see e.g. Slaje 1986: Acharya 2006: xviii-xxviii; Muroya 2011.

15 See TSPS: 55-56: tathā cāhuḥ praśastamatiprabhr̥tayaḥ:
sakalabhuvanahetutvād evāsya sarvajñatvaṁ siddham, kartuḥ
kāryopādānopakaraṇaprayojanasampradānaparijñānāt. iha hi yo yasya kartā
bhavati sa tasyopādānādīni jānīte. yathā kulālaḥ kumbhādīnāṁ kartā
tadupādānaṁ mr̥tpiṇḍam, upakaraṇāni ca cakrādīni, prayojanam
udakāharaṇādi, kuṭumbinaṁ ca sampradānaṁ jānīta ity etat prasiddham;
tatheśvaraḥ sakalabhuvanānāṁ kartā, sa tadupādānāni
paramāṇvādilakṣaṇāni, tadupakaraṇāni dharmādharmadikkālādīni,
vyavahāropakaraṇāni sāmānyaviśeṣasamavāyalakṣaṇāni, prayojanam upabhogaṁ
sampradānasaṁjñakāṁś ca puruṣāñ jānīta ity ataḥ siddham asya
sarvajñatvam iti. “And thus, Praśastamati [= Praśastapāda] and [others]
have said the following. ‘Because the [Lord] is the cause of all worlds,
his omniscience is established, because an agent has the full knowledge
of the effect, the material cause, the instrumental causes, the purpose
and the recipients [of the created object]. For in this [world], the
agent of [something] knows this [thing]’s material cause and so on. Just
as it is well known that a potter, who is the agent of e.g. pots, knows
their material cause, [i.e.] the lump of clay, [their] instrumental
causes, [i.e.] the wheel and so on, [their] purpose, [i.e.] containing
water and so on, and [their] recipient, [i.e.] someone in charge of the
household; in the same way, the Lord, who is the agent of all worlds,
knows their material causes, which consist of the atoms and so on, their
instrumental causes, [i.e.] merit and demerit, space, time and so on,
the instrumental causes of usage (vyavahāra) that consist of generality,
particularity and inherence, the purpose, [i.e.] the experience [of
pleasure and pain], and men, who are designated as the recipients.
Therefore the [Lord]’s omniscience is established.’” This fragment
probably comes from Praśastapāda’s lost Ṭīkā (see Chemparathy 1968:
78ff; Bronkhorst 1996a: 285). On the name Praśastamati, see Chemparathy
1970: 249ff.

16 See NMĪS: 98: yathā ca kulālaḥ sakalakalaśādikāryakalāpotpatti-
saṁvidhānaprayojanādyabhijño bhavaṁs tasya kāryacakrasya kartā,
tatheyatas trailokyasya niravadhiprāṇisukhaduḥkhasādhanasya
sr̥ṣṭisaṁhārasaṁvidhānaṁ saprayojanaṁ bahuśāstraṁ jānann eva sraṣṭā
bhavitum arhati maheśvaraḥ. tasmāt sarvajñaḥ. “And just as a potter is
the agent of all effects [such as pots, etc.] while knowing how to
produce all the effects that are dishes and so on, for what purpose
[they are], and so on; in the same way, the Great Lord can be the
[universal] creator only [if he] knows how to create and destroy these
three worlds which produce pleasure and pain in the innumerable living
beings, as well as what the purpose [of these creations and
destructions] is, [and] the numerous sciences [required for such an
activity]; therefore he is omniscient.”

17 See NKaṇ: 151, quoted below, n 48.

18 See ĀTV: 410-11; Chemparathy 1972: 166-67.

19 See ĪS: 6, quoting ŚV, Sambandhākṣepaparihāra 79-80ab:
kumbhakārādyadhiṣṭhānaṁ ghaṭādau yadi ceṣyate* । neśvarādhiṣṭhitatvaṁ
syād asti cet sādhyahīnatā ।। yathāsiddhe ca dr̥ṣṭānte bhaved dhetor
viruddhatā । [*ceṣyate corr.: veṣyate ĪS (cf. Krasser 1999: 220, n 17)].
“Moreover, if [you] consider that in [the case of] the pot for instance,
the controlling agency (adhiṣṭhāna) is that of the potter for instance,
[then the effects endowed with such a specific arrangement] cannot be
controlled by the Lord: if [you consider that they] are [governed by the
Lord, then the example] lacks the property to be proven (sādhyahīnatā);
but if [you understand] the example as it is [normally] understood
(yathāsiddha), [i.e. if you admit that the controlling agent of the pot
is the potter and not the Lord, then] the reason must be contradictory
(viruddha).” See Taber 1986: 111; Krasser 2002: 220.

20 On Dharmakīrti’s criticism of the inference of īśvara, see e.g.
Oberhammer 1965: 10-22; Vattanky 1984: 33-39; Jackson 1986; Krasser
1999, 2002: 19ff.

21 See Krasser 1999.

22 Utpaladeva thus quotes PV, Pramāṇasiddhipariccheda 11 and 13 in ĪS:
8-9: siddhaṁ yādr̥g adhiṣṭhātr̥bhāvābhāvānuvr̥ttimat । sanniveśādi tad
yuktaṁ tasmād yad* anumīyate ।। anyathā kumbhakāreṇa mr̥dvikārasya
kasyacit । ghaṭādeḥ karaṇāt sidhyed valmīkasyāpi tatkr̥tiḥ ।। [*tasmād
yad corr.: yasmād tad ĪS] “[Only a controlling agent] inferred from e.g.
a [particular] arrangement such that it is established to [exist or not]
according to whether a [particular] controlling agent exists or not is
correct[ly inferred]. Otherwise, an anthill too would be established to
be the [potter]’s creation on the grounds that a particular modification
of clay such as a pot is produced by the potter.” On these verses see
Krasser 2002: 23ff.

23 PV, Pramāṇasiddhipariccheda 12: vastubhede prasiddhasya śabdasāmyād
abhedinaḥ । na yuktānumitiḥ pāṇḍudravyād iva hutāśane ।। “The inference
of [something] well known is not right [when it occurs] on account of
[something else] that [seems to have] no difference [with a valid
reason] due to a [mere] verbal similarity (śabdasāmya), whereas [in
fact] there is a difference as regards the real entities (vastu)
[designated by the same words] — for instance, [the inference] of fire
on account of [the presence of] a white substance [is not right, since
smoke and snow, while being both called ‘white substances’, are
different].” See Krasser 1999: 217; Krasser 2002: 24ff. Utpaladeva was
apparently alluding to this verse (and to the notion of śabdasāmya in
particular) in his lost Vivr̥ti, albeit in a different context: see ĪPVV
II: 165; ĪPV I: 190-91(for an analysis of these passages see Ratié
2011b: 494-98).

24 See Taber 1986: 115.

25 See ĪS: 5: tathā hi sanniveśaviśeṣasya buddhimanmātreṇānvayaḥ
pradarśyate, na tu buddhimadviśeṣeṇa kumbhakāreṇeśvareṇa vā. “To
explain: [the inference] demonstrates the [invariable] co-presence
(anvaya) of a specific arrangement with an intelligent being in general
(buddhimanmātra), and not [its invariable co-presence] with a particular
intelligent being (buddhimadviśeṣa) that would be either the potter or
the Lord.”

26 See ĪS: 6 (immediately before quoting Kumārila): evam ihāpi neśvareṇa
buddhimatā kumbhakāreṇa vānvayapradarśanaṁ
yato'siddhānvayatādidoṣodbhāvanaṁ kriyate. “In the same way, in the case
[of the inference of the Lord] as well, [the inference involves] no
demonstration of the [invariable] co-presence [of a specific
arrangement] with either an intelligent Lord or a potter, since [if it
were the case,] this would lead to the fault [consisting of] the fact
that the [invariable] co-presence is not established, etc.”

27 See ĪS: 5: tat tu sāmānyarūpaṁ na viśeṣasambandhaṁ vinā sthitiṁ
labhata iti pakṣasambandhaucityānusāreṇa vyaktiviśeṣaṁ kulālaṁ kuvindam
īśvaram anyaṁ vāpy āśrayaviśeṣam āśrayatvenāvalambate. “Nonetheless,
this general form (sāmānyarūpa) is not established without a
relationship with a particular (viśeṣasambandha). Therefore [in such an
inference we] rely on a particular individual (vyaktiviśeṣa), [i.e.] a
potter, a weaver, the Lord or any other particular substrate [that we
use] as a substrate [for the inferred general form] according to whether
[this particular individual] is appropriate for a relationship with the
subject of the inference (pakṣa).” Cf. Krasser 2002: 151-52.

28 See ĪS: 5: yathā dhūmamātreṇa dūrāt khadiravane 'gnimātre 'py
anumīyamāne khādiratvaviśeṣo dhūmaviśeṣānapekṣayāpy āśrayavaśāt
prasiddhyati. “Just as, when inferring merely fire in general from smoke
in general [because we see smoke] in the distance in a forest of
khadiras, [we] are well aware of the [fire’s] particularity that is [the
property of] being of a khadira type, regardless of the particular
smoke, due to the substrate (āśraya) [that is appropriate for a
relationship with the forest of khadiras which is the subject of the
inference] . . .” Cf. Taber 1986: 109-10. Utpaladeva also takes as an
example of inference the Sāṁkhya teleological argument that aims at
proving the existence of the Self from the fact that things are “for the
benefit of another” (parārtha). On this inference, see Watson 2006:
192-202; Eltschinger and Ratié 2013: 152-72. On Utpaladeva’s use of this
Sāṁkhya argument here, see Taber 1986: 110.

29 See ĪS 8-9: na kulālena neśenāpy anvayo 'tra pradarśyate । yato
viruddhatāsya syād asiddhānvayatāpi vā ।। kevalaṁ
buddhimanmātravyāptisaṁdarśanād api । pakṣadharmabalād dhīmān kvacit
kaścit pratīyate ।। “In this [inference of the Lord, what we]
demonstrate is not the [invariable] co-presence [of a specific
arrangement] with the potter, nor is it [the invariable co-presence of
this specific arrangement] with the Lord, since [if it were so,] either
the [reason] would be contradictory, or the [invariable] co-presence
would not be established [in the example]. Nonetheless, [we] acknowledge
[the existence of] a particular intelligent [entity] in a particular
[case], although [we gain this knowledge] by demonstrating [only] the
invariable concomitance [of a specific arrangement] with an intelligent
being in general, by virtue of a [particular] property [belonging to]
the subject of the inference (pakṣadharmabalāt).” Cf. Krasser 2002: 153.

30 See ĪS: 6: anyonyopayogitanukaraṇādisarvakriyaiveśvaratvaṁ yathā
mr̥tsanniveśaviśeṣakartr̥taiva kulālatvam. “Being the Lord (īśvaratva) is
nothing but creating everything, [i.e.] bodies, organs and so on, which
help each other [in the performance of their respective functions], just
as being a potter is nothing but creating a specific arrangement from
clay.”

31 See ĪS: 6: tena yathā dhūmenāgniḥ sāmānyena kvacit pradeśe
sādhyamānas tatpradeśādhāraviśiṣṭaḥ sāmarthyāt sidhyati na tu tatra
pramāṇāntaram upayujyate, tatheśvarasādhane 'pi. “Therefore a fire, when
demonstrated [to exist] as [a fire] in general in a particular place
thanks to [the presence of] smoke, is proved by implication (sāmarthyāt)
[to exist as a fire] particularized by the substrate that is this
[particular] place, while no other means of knowledge is used [to prove]
this [particularity], in the same way, in the demonstration of the Lord
as well [, no additional means of knowledge is needed to prove that the
intelligent cause in general is the Lord].”

32 This accusation had been put forward by Kumārila, who had argued that
if the theist merely intends to prove that the universe has a cause in
general, he only proves what his opponents too already admit, since the
Mīmāṁsakas consider that the specific arrangement of the universe is
determined by the individuals’ past actions and their karmic
retribution. See ŚV, Sambandhākṣepaparihāra 75: kasyacid dhetumātratvaṁ
yady adhiṣṭhātr̥teṣyate । karmabhiḥ sarvajīvānāṁ tatsiddheḥ
siddhasādhanam ।। “If [what] you mean [when talking about] the fact that
something is a controlling agent [of the universe] is [merely] the fact
that it is a cause in general (hetumātra) [of the universe], [then you
only] prove what is [already] established [for us too] (siddhasādhana),
since [we consider that] this [causality in general] is established
through the [past] actions (karman) of all living beings.” As shown in
Krasser 1999, this criticism (or at least a very similar one) was
appropriated by Dharmakīrti and is mentioned in PV,
Pramāṇasiddhipariccheda 10: sthitvāpravr̥ttisaṁsthānaviśeṣārthakriyādiṣu
। iṣṭasiddhir asiddhir vā dr̥ṣṭānte saṁśayo’thavā ।। “[The opponents’
inferential reasons] such as ‘activity after a rest’, ‘a specific
arrangement’ and ‘fulfilling a purpose’ contain [logical faults in so
far as they] prove what is already admitted [by us too] (iṣṭasiddhi), or
[what they must prove] is not established in the example, or there
[remains] a doubt [regarding the inferential reasons].” See also Krasser
2002: 22ff.

33 ĪS: 8: na cāpi ghaṭādisvalakṣaṇaviśiṣṭa* eva sanniveśaḥ pramāṇena
siddha iti sa evānyatra dharmiṇy adr̥ṣṭakartr̥ke dr̥ṣṭasajātīyakam eva
kartāraṁ sādhayati na tu sanniveśanāmātram, tasya sāmānyarūpasya
kāryatvāsiddher iti vācyam; yataḥ svalakṣaṇam eva yady api
svalakṣaṇāpekṣayā darśanādarśanābhyāṁ kāryaṁ pratīyate, tathāpi tat**
svalakṣaṇaṁ kāryatvena tathā siddhaṁ sajātīyasvalakṣaṇāntarāṇy api
tatkāraṇasajātīyasvalakṣaṇāntarakāryatvena vyavasthāpayati, yathā sakr̥d
apy eko dhūmo 'gnikāryatayā siddho dhūmāntarāṇy apy agnikāryatvena***
siddhāny eva karoti. [*ghaṭādisvalakṣaṇaviśiṣṭa em. Krasser 2002: 154:
ghaṭādisvalakṣaṇo viśiṣṭa ĪS. **tat em. Krasser ibid.: tat tathā ĪS. ***
agnikāryatvena em. Krasser ibid.: agnikāryatve ĪS]. “Moreover, one
cannot say[, as Dharmakīrti does:] ‘since an arrangement is established
[to be an effect] by a [valid] means of knowledge only [if it is]
particularized (viśiṣṭa) as a particular (svalakṣaṇa) such as a pot,
with respect to another subject of inference whose agent is not
perceived, this same [arrangement consisting of a particular merely]
proves [the existence of] an agent that [can] only [be] of the same sort
(sajātīya) as the perceived [one], and not an arrangement in general
(sanniveśanāmātra), because that which consists of a generality
(sāmānya) cannot be established to be an effect [, so that it is
illegitimate to infer the agency of īśvara by analogy with that of the
potter.’ One cannot say that,] because even though one only grasps an
effect that is a particular through the perception and non-perception
[that establish invariable concomitance] with respect to a[nother]
particular, nonetheless, this particular that is thus established to be
an effect establishes in turn other particulars of the same sort
(sajātīya) as being effects [consisting of] other particulars having a
cause of the same sort as the [first particular], just as a single
[particular instance of] smoke, even though [it occurs] only once, is
established to be an effect of fire [and thus] enables [us] to establish
that other [particular instances of] smoke as well are effects of fire.”
See Taber 1986: 115-16; Krasser 2002: 153-55.

34 ĪS: 8: tac ca kāryasvalakṣaṇam
anekasahakārijanya-tayānekavidhasvalakṣaṇāntaraiḥ sajātīyam. tathā ca
ghaṭasvalakṣaṇaṁ mr̥nmayatvena valmīkādibhiḥ, sanniveśena paṭādibhiḥ,
parivartulatvena piṣṭādimayaśarāvādibhir vicchinnatvena
cchinnavr̥kṣādibhir ity evamādinā krameṇaikaikajātiyuktāni svalakṣaṇāny
ekaikakāraṇakāryāṇi vyavasthāpyante. “And this particular [established
to be] an effect is of the same sort as the other particulars,
[although] they are not of the same sort in so far as they are produced
by cooperating [causes] (sahakārin) that differ. And thus, the
particular that is a pot [is of the same sort] as [particulars] such as
an anthill in so far as it is made of clay; [it is of the same sort] as
[particulars] such as a cloth in so far as it has a [specific]
arrangement; [it is of the same sort] as [particulars] such as a bowl
full of flour for instance in so far as it is round; [and it is of the
same sort] as a cut tree for instance in so far as it is separated [from
other things]. It is in such ways that particulars belonging to this or
that kind (ekaikajāti) are established to be effects of this or that
cause.” See Taber 1986: 116; Krasser 2002: 155.

35 ĪS: 8: tajjātīyārthitāyās tajjātīyakāraṇopādānāya saugatair apīyaṁ
vyavasthā kr̥tā, na mr̥daḥ saṁsthānaṁ na kulālān mr̥drūpatety evaṁ
vadadbhiḥ. “The Buddhists themselves, when saying ‘[the pot’s]
arrangement does not [come] from clay, the [pot’s property of]
consisting of clay does not [come] from the potter’, make such a
distinction out of their desire to find [effects] of the same kind so as
to grasp causes of the same kind.”

36 ĪS: 8: vastusthitiś cedr̥śy eva, na hi yathā ghaṭaḥ saṁsthānavān
buddhimatā puruṣeṇa niyatena tathā paṭo 'pi. tathaiva tu* pratītir
ubhayatrāpi prājñakr̥tatvapratīter upayogāya ca pravr̥ttir ity evaṁ
vyavasāya eva**. [*tu conj.: ca ĪS. **vyavasāya eva em. Krasser 2002:
154: vyavasāyaiva ĪS]. “And the establishment of things [in practical
existence occurs] in the same way. For a cloth does not have an
arrangement [produced] by a specific intelligent person in the same way
as a pot does [, since they differ as regards material or instrumental
causes]; yet in both cases, [we] grasp [them] in the same way [as being
arrangements produced by a specific intelligent person,] and [we] make
effort so as to use [both the pot and the cloth precisely] because we
grasp [both of them] as products of an intelligent [cause]: this is
exactly [how] determination (vyavasāya) occurs.” See Krasser 2002:
155-56.

37 ĪS: 8: kevalaṁ teṣāṁ pareṣāṁ saugatānāṁ yathā sajātīyatvaṁ jātyā
vinaivāvaśyābhyupagantavyam ekapratyayakāritvaṁ svalakṣaṇaniṣṭham eva
tathaivaitad apīti. “Nonetheless, these Buddhist opponents must
necessarily acknowledge that [pots and clothes] are of the same kind [in
this respect], even though [they] refuse [to acknowledge the existence
per se of] the universal (jāti), [when they acknowledge that the pot and
the cloth] produce the same apprehension [in so far as they are both
grasped as products of an intelligent agent, and when they acknowledge
that the production of this same apprehension] rests exclusively on a
particular [and not on a universal. Therefore] in the same way, [they
must necessarily acknowledge] the [fact that the causes] too [must be of
the same kind, i.e. intelligent agents].”

38 ĪS: 9: ity avyabhicāry eva sanniveśaḥ strīpuṁsāder ivānyonya-
sādhyārthakriyānuguṇyādiviśeṣitas tanvāder īśvarakartr̥tāsādhana iti.
“Therefore the invariable arrangement particularized by the harmony
(ānuguṇya) in the functions (arthakriyā) [that the parts] perform thanks
to each other, as [the functions] of man and woman for instance,
establishes that the Lord is the agent of bodies, etc.”

39 Taber 1986: 112-14.

40 NMĪS: 83: dhūmo hi mahānase kumbhadāsīphūtkāramārutasaṁdhukṣya-
mānamandajvalanajanmā kr̥śaprāyaprakr̥tir upalabdhaḥ. sa yadi parvate
prabalasamīraṇollasitahutavahapluṣyamāṇ-
amahāmahīruhaskandhendhanaprabhavo bahulabahulaḥ khamaṇḍalam akhilam
ākrāmann upalabhyate, tat kim idānīm analapramitiṁ mā kārṣīt. atha
viśeṣarahitaṁ dhūmamātram agnimātreṇa vyāptam avagatam iti tatas
tadanumānam. ihāpi sanniveśamātraṁ kartr̥mātreṇa vyāptam iti tato ’pi tad
anumīyatām. “For [we] observe that in a kitchen, smoke arises from a
weak flame kindled by the air blown by a servant [, and that] its form
is usually meager. If [we] see that the [smoke] on a hill arises from
the fuel [consisting of] the trunks of big trees burnt by a fire fanned
by a strong wind, [and that this smoke] is huge [and] stretches up to
the sky, then should [this second smoke perceived] now not produce [in
us] the knowledge of fire? If [the opponent answers that we] understand
smoke in general, devoid of any particularity, to be invariably
concomitant with fire in general, hence the inference of [fire], [we
answer that] in the [case of the Lord] as well, an arrangement in
general is invariably concomitant with an agent in general, therefore
let it be inferred too!” Cf. ĀḌ: 164: anya eva hi dhūmo’sau kr̥śajanmā
mahānase । anya evāyam adrau ca vyāptavyomadigantaraḥ ।। “For this smoke
which arises meagerly in the kitchen is one thing, and that [smoke] on
the hill pervading all the quarters of the sky is quite another!”

41 See NMĪS: 83: nanu sanniveśaśabdasādhāraṇamātram atra, na
vastusāmānyaṁ kiṁcid asti. bhikṣo, dhūme’pi bhavaddarśane kiṁ
vastumātram asti. “[­ The Buddhist:] But in this [inference of the Lord]
there is only a verbal generality (śabdasādhāraṇa) ‘arrangement’, [but]
no real generality (vastusāmānya) at all. [­The Naiyāyika:] O monk, in
the smoke as well, according to your system, is there any [such thing as
a] real general entity (vastumātra)?” Jayanta later concludes (ibid.:
84): ihāpi sanniveśavikalpānuvr̥ttes tvatprakalpitam apoharūpam eva
sāmānyam iṣyatām. “In this [case of the inference of the Lord from a
specific arrangement] as well [as in the case of the inference of fire
from smoke, you] must admit a generality ­[even though] it is nothing
but an exclusion that you construct in accordance with the concept of
arrangement.” (For a translation of the full passage, see Krasser 2002:
106-08). Cf. ĀḌ: 166, where the Buddhist’s objection “But whereas in
other [cases] there is a real generality, in this [case] there is only a
verbal generality, and no real generality; and with respect to a [mere]
verbal generality there is an overextension [of the reasoning]” (nanv
anyatra vāstavaṁ sāmānyam, iha tu śabdasāmānyamātraṁ na tu
vastusāmānyam, śabdasāmānye cātiprasaṅgaḥ), is answered: “But how could
there be a real generality in the house of a Buddhist?” (kuto
bauddhagr̥he vāstavaṁ sāmānyam).

42 See NMĪS: 84: api ca sakartr̥katvābhimateṣv api saṁsthāneṣu na
sarvātmanā tulyatvaṁ pratīyate. na hi ghaṭasaṁsthānaṁ paṭasaṁsthānaṁ
catuḥśālasaṁsthānaṁ ca susadr̥śam iti. saṁsthānasāmānyaṁ tu parvatādāv
api vidyata eveti. “Moreover, although [specific] arrangements are
considered as having an agent, [they] are not apprehended as being
entirely similar. For the arrangement of a pot is not entirely similar
to the arrangement of a cloth or to the arrangement of a building.
Nonetheless, the generality ‘arrangement’ is indeed found in a mountain,
etc., as well.” Cf. ĀḌ: 166: dharmaṁ niyatam ālambya bhavati hy
anumākramaḥ । kva vā sarvātmanā sāmyaṁ sādhyadr̥ṣṭāntadharmiṇoḥ ।। “For
the inferential process rests on a specific property; in what case could
there be a complete similarity between the example [possessing the
property] to be established and the subject of the inference?”

43 NMĪS: 97-98: apare pakṣadharmabalād eva viśeṣalābham
abhyupagacchanti. na hīdr̥śaṁ paridr̥śyamānam anekarūpam aparimitam
anantaprāṇigatavicitrasukhaduḥkhasādhanaṁ bhuvanādi kāryam anatiśayena
puṁsā kartuṁ śakyam iti. yathā candanadhūmam itaradhūmavisadr̥śam
avalokya cāndana eva vahnir anumīyate, tathā vilakṣaṇāt kāryād vilakṣaṇa
eva kartānumāsyate. “Others consider that the particularity [of the
inferred agent in general] is obtained by virtue of the sole property of
the subject of the inference (pakṣadharmabalāt). For such an effect as
the worlds, etc., which [we] observe [to be] manifold, unlimited, [and]
to produce various pleasures and pains in the innumerable living beings,
cannot be produced by an ordinary (anatiśaya) person. Just as upon
seeing sandalwood smoke, which is different from other smokes, one
infers a fire that is necessarily a sandalwood [fire], in the same way,
due to the effect having a peculiar characteristic, one infers an agent
that necessarily has a peculiar characteristic.” Cf. ĀḌ: 166, where the
Buddhist objection “But this effect that is the earth, etc., indeed has
a peculiar characteristic!” (nanu vilakṣaṇam evedaṁ kṣityādi kāryam) is
answered in the following way: “But [then] you should admit that [its]
agent [too] must have a peculiar characteristic!” (nanu vilakṣaṇam eva
kartāraṁ kalpayantu bhavantaḥ).

44 Taber 1986: 114.

45 Ibid.

46 See above, n 43: Jayanta presents the argument as belonging to
“others”.

47 According to Oberhammer 1965: 32, this earlier Naiyāyika may have
been Trilocana. Note, however, that Krasser 2002: 101 emphasizes the
distance between the known fragments of Trilocana’s work and the
argument of specification through pakṣadharmatā found e.g. in
Vācaspatimiśra’s NKaṇ (see below, n 48).

48 See NKaṇ: 151 (as edited in Krasser 2002: 93): tad ayuktam,
sāmānyamātravyāptāv apy antarbhāvitaviśeṣasyaiva sāmānyasya
pakṣadharmatāvaśena sādhyadharmiṇy anumānāt, itarathā
sarvānumānocchedaprasaṅgāt. “This is not correct, because even though
there is an invariable concomitance between [two] mere generalities
(sāmānyamātra), with respect to that which must be established to bear
the property, one infers a generality that necessarily includes a
particularity, thanks to the fact that the subject of the inference has
a [particular] property (pakṣadharmatāvaśena); since otherwise, as a
consequence all inferences would be annihilated.” See also NKaṇ: 151 (as
edited in Krasser 2002: 98): saty apy utpattimattvasyācetanopādānatvasya
copādānopakaraṇasampradānaprayojanajñakartr̥mātravyāptatve
vivādādhyāsiteṣu pakṣadharmatābalād viśiṣṭasya tasya siddhiḥ. anyathā
sāmānyasyāpi vyāpakābhimatasyāsiddhiḥ syāt, nirviśeṣasyāsambhavāt,
viśeṣasya cānyasyānupapatteḥ. asarvajñasya
cātrādr̥ṣṭādibhedavijñānarahitasyādhiṣṭhātr̥bhāvāsambhavāt sarvajñātmaka
eva viśeṣo balād āpatati. tena yady apy upalabdhimatkartr̥katvaṁ
vyāptiviṣayaḥ, tathāpi tadviśeṣasya pakṣadharmatābalāt pratilambha iti
viśeṣaviṣayam anumānam. “Even though there is an invariable concomitance
of [the properties] ‘being produced’ and ‘having an unconscious material
cause’ with [the existence of] an agent in general (kartr̥mātra) who
knows the material cause, the instrumental causes, the recipient and the
purpose [of the effect], with respect to the [things] that are in
dispute [i.e. natural composite entities that are not unanimously
considered as effects,] this [agent] is established as [being]
particularized [by omniscience] by virtue of the fact that the subject
of the inference possesses a [particular] property (pakṣadharmatābalāt);
otherwise, the generality considered as invariably concomitant would not
be established, because [such an invariable concomitance] is not
possible for [something] that is not particularized, and because no
other particularity is possible [as regards this agent]. Since in this
[case] someone who is not omniscient [and therefore who] does not know
the various [unconscious instrumental causes] such as the invisible
[force] (adr̥ṣṭa) could not be a controller (adhiṣṭhātr̥), the
particularity consisting in [being] omniscient necessarily follows [for
this agent]. Therefore even though the invariable concomitance regards
[only the property of] having a conscious agent, nonetheless, one
understands this particularity due to the fact that the subject of the
inference has a [particular] property (pakṣadharmatābalāt) — therefore
the inference regards a particularity [and not a mere generality].”
While commenting on Jayanta’s mention of the pakṣadharmatā argument, H.
Krasser remarks that we cannot determine with certainty who formulated
it in the first place and that among Naiyāyikas, only Vācaspatimiśra and
Vittoka seem to have propounded such a theory, but that the latter seems
to be later than Jayanta. If the dates proposed for Vācaspatimiśra (i.e.
c. 950–1000) in Acharya (2006: xviii-xxviii) are right, Vācaspatimiśra
cannot have been Jayanta’s source either. In any case Utpaladeva (fl. c.
925-75) certainly knew Jayanta’s NM, but (as far as I know) it is not
impossible that he also knew at least some of Vācaspatimiśra’s writings
(on the proximity of Utpaladeva’s argument with Vācaspati’s, see Krasser
2002: 152, n 211).

49 See Krasser 2002: 136.

50 See e.g. the Naiyāyika pūrvapakṣa presented by Kamalaśīla in TSPS: 65
(see Krasser 2002: 81, n 117): yāvatā sāmānyena
buddhimatpūrvakatvamātraṁ sādhyate, tasmiṁś ca siddhe tanvādīnāṁ
sāmarthyād īśvaraḥ kartā siddhyati. na hi ghaṭādivat teṣāṁ kulālādiḥ
kartā sambhavati. tena sāmānyasya viśeṣaviśiṣṭatvāt, tanvādiṣu* cānyasya
kartur asambhāvyamānatvāt, sāmarthyād viśeṣaparigraham antareṇāpīśvara
eva kartāmīṣāṁ sidhyatīti. [*tanvādiṣu TSPS: tarvādiṣu TSPK] “It is only
[the property of] presupposing an intelligent [agent] that [we] prove as
this mere generality; and once this [mere generality] is established, as
an implication (sāmarthyāt) [of it, we] establish that the agent of
bodies and so on is the Lord. For their agent cannot be a potter for
instance, contrary to [the case] of e.g. a pot. Therefore, because the
generality is particularized by this particularity, and because with
respect to bodies and so on, another agent is impossible, as an
implication, even if [we] do not have the full grasp of the
particularity, it is the Lord that is established to be their agent”.
Jñānaśrīmitra’s ĪV: 239 attributes this line of argument to Trilocana
(see Krasser 2002: 79-80). On the fact that this strategy is common in
the Nyāya (and also recurs in the works of later Naiyāyikas such as
Udayana), see Chemparathy 1972: 88-89.

51 See Taber 1986: 120ff.

52 See Bronkhorst 1983, which argues that originally the distinction
between seśvara and anīśvara Sāṁkhya referred to the difference between
the Sāṁkhyas who accepted the agency of God in the creation of the
universe and those who did not, and that up to a rather late period
(i.e. at least the end of the first millenium) the so-called anīśvara
Sāṁkhya did not deny the existence of God but only its causal role in
the cosmic manifestation. Note that in ĪS 26, Utpaladeva designates his
opponent as sāṁkhyam anīśvaram.

53 Such Sāṁkhya refutations of īśvara as the cause of the universe can
be found in GB: 54 and MV: 55-56 ad SK 61, in YD ad SK 15: 157ff (see
Chemparathy 1965 for a translation and analysis), or in TK ad SK 57:
164.

54 ĪS: 12: na hi pradhānasiddhimātreṇaiveśvaranirākr̥tiḥ syād
upādānakāraṇatayā paramāṇusthāna eva pradhānasya mūlakāraṇatvena
samarthanāt. tac ca pradhānena paramāṇuvāda eva yadi paraṁ nirākriyate*
tataḥ pradhānavyavasthā viśva-syopādānakāraṇavicāraprastāve
prameyībhavati, na tu nimittakāraṇo-papādanaprakrame. [*nirākriyate
conj. : nirākriyeta ĪS] “For the Lord cannot be refuted merely by
establishing matter, since matter is proved to be the primordial cause
[of the universe only] in so far as it is [proved to be] the material
cause instead of atoms. And as a consequence, if it is only atomism that
is refuted by [establishing] matter, then establishing matter is an
object fit for the topic of the examination of the universe’s material
cause, but not for the topic of the explanation of [its] efficient
cause.”

55 See Taber 1986: 122-23.

56 ĪS: 12: tad evaṁ mūlaprakr̥tiḥ
sattvarajastamaḥsaṁjñaguṇa-trayasāmyātmikā prakr̥titayaiva
prasavadharmiṇī guṇānām evāṅgāṅgibhāvagamanena yāvan mahadādivikārātmanā
pariṇamate, tāvat puruṣārthatvam eva tatra tasyāḥ svabhāvabhūtaṁ
nimittam. “Therefore primordial nature, which consists of a state of
balance between the three qualities (guṇa) called sattva, rajas and
tamas, [and] which, precisely because it is a prakr̥ti [i.e. literally,
‘that which generates’,] has the property of generating, transforms
itself by bringing these very qualities to a state [in which they] serve
each other (aṅgāṅgibhāva), [and it brings them to this state through an
activity] consisting in transforming [them] into the Great [, i.e. the
intellect (buddhi)], etc. In so far as [primordial nature acts thus,]
the efficient cause (nimitta) of this [transformation] is nothing but
[primordial nature’s property of] being for the benefit of the Person
(puruṣārtha); [i.e. the efficient cause] is the very nature of this
[prakr̥ti].” Here the Sāṁkhya opponent seems to rely on SK 56-57 while
playing on the meanings of the term nimitta (apparently rather used in
the SK in the sense of “goal”): ity eṣa prakr̥tikr̥to
mahadādiviṣayabhūtaparyantaḥ । pratipuruṣavimokṣārthaṁ svārtha iva
parārtha ārambhaḥ ।। vatsavivr̥ddhinimittaṁ kṣīrasya yathā pravr̥ttir
ajñasya । puruṣavimokṣanimittaṁ tathā pravr̥ttiḥ pradhānasya ।। “This
[world,] from the Great [i.e. the intellect] to the elements that are
[sensory] objects, is produced by primordial nature for the benefit that
is the liberation of each Person; this activity is for the benefit of
another (parārtha) [, i.e. the Person, although it] seems to be for
[nature’s] own benefit. Just as milk, which is unconscious, acts so as
to (nimitta) make the calf grow, in the same way, matter acts so as to
free the Person.” Several commentaries interpret SK 56 as a refutation
of īśvara’s role as an efficient cause. See JM: 111: prakr̥tikr̥ta iti
pradhānakr̥taḥ, neśvarādikr̥ta ity arthaḥ. “Produced by primordial nature
[means] ‘produced by matter’; i.e. it is not produced by the Lord for
instance.” Cf. TK: 164: neśvarādhiṣṭhitaprakr̥tikr̥to
nirvyāpārasyādhiṣṭhātr̥tvāsambhavāt. na hi nirvyāpāras takṣā vāsyādy
adhitiṣṭhati. “It is not produced by a primordial nature that would be
controlled (adhiṣṭhita) by the Lord, because [the Lord,] who does not
act, cannot be a controller; for a carpenter who does not act does not
control the axe and so on.” Vācaspatimiśra further interprets SK 57 as a
justification of the fact that primordial nature, although unconscious,
can act as an efficient cause in so far as it exists for the benefit of
the puruṣa. See TK, ibid., where the objection answered by SK 57 is
stated in the following way: syād etat. svārthaṁ parārthaṁ vā cetanaḥ
pravartate. na ca prakr̥tir acetanaivaṁ bhavitum arhati. tasmād asti
prakr̥ter adhiṣṭhātā cetanaḥ. na ca kṣetrajñāś cetanā api prakr̥tim
adhiṣṭhātum arhanti, teṣāṁ prakr̥tirūpānabhijñatvāt. tasmād asti
sarvārthadarśī prakr̥ter adhiṣṭhātā, sa ceśvara iti. ata āha . . .
“Suppose that [the following] be [urged]: a conscious [entity] acts
either for its own benefit or for the benefit of something else; now,
primordial nature, which is unconscious, is incapable of [acting] thus;
therefore there is a conscious controller of primordial nature. And the
individuals, although they are conscious, are not capable of controlling
primordial nature, since they are ignorant of the [various] forms of
primordial nature. Therefore there is a controller of primordial nature
who knows all things; and this controller is the Lord. In response to
this [the author] states . . . .”

57 ĪS: 12: na hi yadr̥cchayā vartamānāyāḥ kāryavargasya
devamānuṣatiryagyonirūpasya tadavāntarajātivaicitryavato niyamena
strīpuṁsasaṁsthānadvayasya vānyonyānuguṇyam upapadyate. tad etat
sanniveśaviśeṣarūpatayābhyupetam īśvaravādināpi. “For the mutual harmony
(ānuguṇya) [found to occur] invariably in all the effects that are
[divided into] gods, men and animals [and that] comprise [a whole]
variety of [different] species within [these divisions], or [the mutual
harmony found to occur invariably] in the two [bodily] structures of a
woman and man, cannot arise from [matter] if [matter] transforms itself
randomly (yadr̥cchayā) [rather than for the benefit of the Person]. Even
the proponent of the Lord [as the cause of the universe] admits this in
so far as [he acknowledges that the universe] is a specific
arrangement.”

58 See ĪS: 12: arthavattvaṁ ca sukhaduḥkhopalambha-saṁpādanārthatayaiva
sarvasyaivārtharūpasya paramparayā paryavasyati. “And [stating that
nature does not act randomly] amounts [to saying that] it has a purpose,
since precisely, the purpose [of nature] is to successively bring about
the perception of pleasure and pain as regards everything that consists
of an object.” See also ĪS: 13: tato yathā
sukhaduḥkhamohamayasarvārthasaṁvedanaṁ* puruṣārthas tathā
śāstropadiṣṭānumānopamānādinā guṇapuruṣāntaropalabdhir api. tad ubhayam
api prayojanaṁ bhogāpavargarūpaṁ** guṇapravr̥tteḥ.
tatprayojanasaṁpādanayogyasvabhāvatā ca nimittakāraṇam ucyate.
[*°sarvārthasaṁvedanam conj.: °parārthasaṁvedanam ĪS. **°rūpaṁ conj.:
°rūpa° ĪS]. “Therefore the benefit of the Person is the awareness of all
objects consisting of pleasure, pain and delusion [which constitute the
three qualities], but also the perception that the qualities and the
Person are distinct, [a perception which occurs] for instance thanks to
the inferences and comparisons taught in treatises. As a consequence,
both of these, i.e. experience (bhoga) and liberation (apavarga), are
the goal of the activity of qualities. And what is called ‘efficient
cause’ is [nothing but] the fact that [primordial nature] has a nature
capable of accomplishing this goal.” Cf. MV: 54: sa cārtho dvividhaḥ.
śabdādyupalabdhir ādir guṇapuruṣāntaropalabdhir antaś ca. triṣu lokeṣu
śabdādiviṣayaiḥ puruṣaṁ yojayati. ante ca guṇapuruṣāntaropalabdhyā
mokṣaṁ kurute. “And this benefit [of the Person] is twofold: first, it
is the perception of [objects] such as sound, and finally, it is the
perception that qualities and the Person are distinct. In the three
worlds, [primordial nature acting for this benefit] connects the Person
with objects such as sound, and finally it induces liberation through
the perception that qualities and the Person are distinct.”

59 See ĪS 21: ata eva pradhānasya mahattvapariṇāminaḥ । nimittakāraṇaṁ
nānyat puruṣārthodyamād r̥te ।। “For this very reason, there is no
efficient cause besides the effort that matter makes for the benefit of
the Person while transforming itself into the Great [, i.e. the
intellect, etc.]”

60 ĪS: 18: tatraitān sāṁkhyān praty ucyate, yathā nāvagato bhavadbhiḥ
sādhanārtha iti. yadi hi sarvavicitrasaṁsthānakāryotpādaneṣu
pradhānasyaiva yā puruṣabhogārthatā saiva nimittakāraṇaṁ kim īśvareṇety
ucyate tat kumbhakāreṇāpi kiṁ ghaṭakaraṇe. tatrāpi prādhānikasya
mr̥tpiṇḍādeḥ puruṣārthasvabhāvatāvaśād eva
tathābhūtasanniveśavadghaṭakaraṇasāmarthyaṁ syāt. “In this regard, [we]
reply to these Sāṁkhyas in [the following] way: you have not understood
the point of the demonstration. For [you ask:] ‘if it is matter’s
[property of] having as its purpose the experience [of pain and
pleasure] by the Person that is the efficient cause with regard to the
production of all the various effects that are [specific] arrangements,
what is the point of the Lord?’ [But to this we] reply: then what is the
point of the potter as well in the production of a pot? [If we followed
your reasoning,] in the [case of the pot] as well, the capacity to
produce a pot endowed with such a [specific] arrangement would be due to
the mere fact that a material [entity] such as the lump of clay has as
its nature to be for the benefit of the Person.”

61 ĪS: 18: atha pradhānasyāyam api svabhāvaviśeṣa eva, yad
ghaṭasanniveśādau daṇḍacakravadbuddhimadapekṣā, tāvatā prādhānikena
kāraṇakalāpena puruṣārthopayogitatsanniveśa-vadghaṭavastusiddheḥ. tad
evam eva tanukaraṇādikāraṇasyāpi prādhānikāt tathāsvabhāvayogāt kathaṁ
tathākaraṇayogya-buddhimadapekṣā neṣyate. “If [, on the other hand, you
consider that] matter has this particular feature that with respect to
the [specific] arrangement of a pot for instance, it requires an
intelligent [agent] equipped with a stick and a wheel, because it is
through all these causes which belong to matter [as transformations of
it]­ that the realization of the thing that is a pot having this
[specific] arrangement contributes to the benefit of the Person, then,
since [you acknowledge that] matter possesses such a nature, [you must
admit that] it is exactly the same with respect to the cause of [such
things] as bodies and organs as well: why [then] do [you] refuse to
admit the requirement of an intelligent [agent] fit for such a creation
[as the universe]?”

62 ĪS 31cd-33ab: lokayātrānusaṁdhānavatīṁ prajñāṁ vinā na hi ।। tathā
cikīrṣāṁ ca vinā vicitraracanodbhavaḥ । sthūlatāmātram eva syān na tu
lokopayoginī ।। racanā niyamena syād vicitrā jātirūpiṇī । “For without a
knowledge (prajñā) involving the synthetic awareness (anusaṁdhāna) of
the course of the world, and similarly, without a desire to act
(cikīrṣā), various [specific] arrangements cannot arise. [Without it,
material elements] may [gather into] gross [, perceptible wholes,] but
there can be no arrangement useful to people, [occurring] invariably,
varied [and] containing [different] species.” On the required synthetic
awareness, see e.g. ĪS: 19-20: tathā hi yāvad idam ito bhavati
kiṁcidadhikaviśeṣāt punar ata evānena viśeṣeṇa saviśeṣam idam eva
bhavati, aparaviśeṣayuktāt punar asmād evānyad evānyajātīyam eva kāryaṁ
jāyate, tataḥ saṁpraty evaṁvidham upayujyate tathaiva karomīty evaṁ
vicāracaturā matir na syāt, tāvat kathaṁ tathābhūtaviśeṣakaraṇāya
hānopādāne syātām. “To explain: [if only material, insentient causes
were to produce specific arrangements designed to contribute to the
benefit of the Person,] how could [they] reject [some auxiliary causes]
and use [others] so as to produce such a specific [arrangement], in so
far as [these causes] could have no such fourfold understanding as this:
‘this [thing A] exists due to that [thing B]; but this same [thing A]
exists while having a particularity due to this same [thing B] when this
[thing B] has some added particularity, [precisely] because of this
particularity [of B]; [and] in turn, when this [thing B] has another
particularity, it produces another effect, which is of another sort than
[A]; therefore now, such a [cause] can contribute [to producing this
particular effect], [and] I am going to act exactly in this way’?”

63 See SK 22: prakr̥ter mahāṁs tato ’haṁkāras tasmād gaṇaś ca ṣoḍaśakaḥ ।
tasmād api ṣoḍaśakāt pañcabhyaḥ pañca bhūtāni ।। “From primordial nature
arises the Great [, i.e. the intellect]; from the [Great] arises egoity
(ahaṁkāra); and from [egoity], the group of the sixteen [i.e. the group
of the five subtle elements, the five organs of perception, the five
organs of action and the mind (manas)]; and in turn, from the five
[subtle elements] within these sixteen [arise] the five gross
[elements].”

64 See SK 23a: adhyavasāyo buddhiḥ . . . “The intellect is
determination. . .”. Cf. GBh: 25: adhyavasāyo buddhilakṣaṇam.
adhyavasānam adhyavasāyaḥ. yathā bīje bhaviṣyadvr̥ttiko’ṅkuras tadvad
adhyavasāyaḥ. ayaṁ ghaṭo’yaṁ paṭa ity evaṁ sati yā sā buddhir iti
lakṣyate. “Determination is the characteristic of the intellect; it is
the act of determining. Just as the sprout that will occur later is
[contained] in the seed, in the same way, determination [is contained in
the intellect]. It is defined as the intellect when such a [thought]
occurs: ‘this is a pot’, ‘this is a cloth’.”

65 See SK 36: ete pradīpakalpāḥ parasparavilakṣaṇā guṇaviśeṣāḥ । kr̥tsnaṁ
puruṣasyārthaṁ prakāśya buddhau prayacchanti. “The [external organs,
egoity and mind,] which differ from each other [and] are particular
[modifications of] the qualities, [functioning] like a lamp, manifest
the entire benefit of the Person and place [it] in the intellect.”

66 ĪS: 23: na ca pradhānasyaiva mūlakāraṇasya vyavasāyādibhir vyaktir
asti tat kathaṁ tasyecchādiyogaḥ puruṣārthoddeśānītaḥ syād yataḥ
pravr̥ttir bhavet. “And matter alone, [considered as] the primordial
cause, [can]not be manifest in the form of determination, [will and
synthetic knowledge]; therefore [at that time,] how could it possess
will [, synthetic knowledge and determination], which would enable it to
be aimed at the benefit of the Person, so that the activity [of matter]
could take place?”

67 ĪS: 23: yady api ca buddher astīcchānusaṁdhānaṁ ca vyāpāras tathāpi
puruṣasannidhānād yāvan na cetyamānaḥ prakāśamāno 'sau saṁpannas tāvan
necchādirūpatāṁ dhatte tathālakṣaṇatvād icchānusaṁdhānādīnām. “And even
if an activity of the intellect does occur [at the beginning of the
universe’s manifestation, namely,] will and a synthetic awareness,
nonetheless, if [this activity of the intellect, which is of a material
nature,] is not reflected upon due to the presence of a Person, [i.e. if
it] does not obtain [to be] manifest [for a consciousness], it cannot
reach the status of will and [synthetic awareness], because will,
synthetic awareness and so on consist in such a [conscious state].” On
the Sāṁkhyas’ endeavour to solve the problem of the relationship between
the material buddhi and the puruṣa’s consciousness, and on Utpaladeva’s
criticism of this solution in the Pratyabhijñā treatise, see Torella
1994: 93, n 12; Ratié 2011a: 94-106, 276-89.

68 See ĪS: 23: atha sarvapuruṣasādhāraṇasyaikasyāpi buddhitattvasya
mahatsaṁjñakasya pratipuruṣam adhyavasāyalakṣaṇavr̥ttiḥ satyaṁ bhidyate,
mahatkāraṇāsmitājanmano vā manaḥsaṁjñakaraṇasya, eṣādhyavasāyādivr̥ttiḥ
pratyekapuruṣaniyatāstu, na tayottarakālabhāvinyā pradhānasya mahato vā
puruṣārthānusaṁdhānecchāvattā yujyate. “But if [you reply that] although
one, [i.e.] common to all Persons, the principle of the intellect
(buddhitattva) called the Great, or the organ called mind (manas) which
arises from egoity (asmitā) that [in turn] has as its cause the Great­,
transforms itself into [a manifestation] characterized as determination
(adhyavasāya) [and] is in fact differentiated according to each Person,
[then] this transformation into determination and so on must be
restricted to each Person, [but] neither matter nor the [principle of
the intellect called] the Great can be endowed with synthetic knowledge
and will regarding the benefit of the Person through this
[transformation,] since [this transformation only] arises at a later
time.”

69 See ĪS: 23-24: kiṁ tu pradhānasyaiva prathamavikārakaraṇa eva
sarvapuruṣoddeśena sāmānyānusaṁdhānecchāvyavasāyādivr̥ttiḥ prathamā
buddhisaṁjñāsty eva, yena tasyāpi buddhipūrvakāritā syāt. tadaiva tad
api na yuktam, pradhānasya
sarvathaivāvyaktarūpatvenānupalakṣaṇīyavr̥ttitvāt. na ca vr̥ttau
puruṣeṇāsaṁviditāyām icchānusaṁdhānādirūpatvaṁ saṁbhavati, puruṣeṇāpi
pradhānavr̥tteḥ kena saṁvedyamānatā sarvapuruṣoddeśena sāmānyapravr̥tteḥ,
ekaikena cet tat tasya sarvajñatvaṁ syāt . . . “Rather, when matter
first transforms itself, there must be a first transformation into
synthetic knowledge, will, determination and so on which is called
‘intellect’ [and] is universal (sāmānya), [i.e.] concerns all Persons,
[and it is] thanks to [this transformation] that even [matter] can be an
intelligent agent. [But again,] at that very moment [when matter starts
transforming itself], this too is impossible, because the transformation
of matter cannot be perceived, since its nature is absolutely
unmanifest. And if no Person is aware of this activity, it cannot
consist of will, synthetic knowledge and so on; and which Person is
aware of this transformation of matter, since this activity is universal
(sāmānya), [i.e. since it] concerns all Persons? If [you reply]: each of
them, then [each of] them should be omniscient . . .” See also ĪS: 24:
atha sāmānyarūpeṇaiva sarvajñena ca puruṣaviśeṣeṇa sāmānyapradhānavr̥tteḥ
saṁvedyamānatā tat sa eveśvaro 'stu, tasyaiva viśvanirmitsā saṁvedyā
satī sambandhinī bhavatīti. “But [if you reply that] it is a special
Person (puruṣaviśeṣa), who has a universal form [and not an individual
one] and who is omniscient, who is aware of the universal transformation
of matter, then let [us] admit that this [Person] is the Lord himself,
since only he can have the desire to create the universe while being
aware of it.” Cf. ĪS 41cd-42ab: athāpi sarvapuruṣābhinnenaikena kenacit
।। vedyā sā vaiṣa tarhy ekaḥ kartā jñātā sa ceśvaraḥ । “But if [the
Sāṁkhya opponent had] rather [reply that] a certain unique [entity]
which is not distinct from all Persons (sarvapuruṣābhinna) is aware of
this [desire to create,] then [he must concede the existence of] a
single agent [and] knower, and this is [what we call] the Lord.”

70 Taber 1986: 119, 128.

71 See NV ad NS IV.1.21: 433: kaḥ punar īśvarasya kāraṇatve nyāyaḥ –
ayaṁ nyāyo ’bhidhīyate. pradhānaparamāṇukarmāṇi prāk pravr̥tter
buddhimatkāraṇādhiṣṭhitāni pravartante’cetanatvād vāsyādivad iti. yathā
vāsyādi buddhimatā takṣṇādhiṣṭhitam acetanatvāt pravartate, tathā
pradhānaparamāṇukarmāṇy acetanāni pravartante. tasmāt tāny api
buddhimatkāraṇādhiṣṭhitānīti. “But what is the reasoning [proving] that
the Lord is the cause [of the universe]? Here is [how we] formulate this
argument: before [they] start acting, matter, atoms and actions [that
lead to karmic retribution] are prompted [to act in so far as they are]
controlled (adhiṣṭhita) by an intelligent cause, because they are
unconscious, just as an axe. [For] just as an axe for instance is
prompted [to cut a tree in so far as it is] controlled by an intelligent
woodcutter, because it is unconscious, in the same way, matter, atoms
and actions, which are unconscious, are prompted [to act so as to
produce the universe]; therefore they too are controlled by an
intelligent cause.”

72 See ibid.: tatra pradhānakāraṇikās tāvat puruṣārtham adhiṣṭhāyakaṁ
pradhānasya varṇayanti. puruṣārthena prayuktaṁ pradhānaṁ pravartata iti.
puruṣārthaś ca dvedhā bhavati, śabdādyupalabdhir guṇapuruṣāntaradarśanaṁ
ceti. tadubhayaṁ pradhānapravr̥ttiṁ vinā na bhavatīti. “In this regard,
first of all, those who consider matter as the cause [of the universe]
explain that [what] controls matter is the benefit of the Person
(puruṣārtha), [i.e.] that matter is prompted [to act] while being
directed by the benefit of the Person. And the benefit of the Person is
twofold: [on the one hand, it is] the perception of [objects] such as
sound, and [on the other hand,] the realization that qualities and the
Person are distinct. And these two [sorts of benefit of the Person]
cannot occur without the activity of matter.”

73 See NV ad IV.1.21: 433: na, prāk pravr̥ttes tadabhāvāt. yāvat
pradhānaṁ mahadādibhāvena na pariṇamate, tāvan na śabdādyupalabdhir
asti, na guṇapuruṣāntaropalabdhir iti hetvabhāvāt pradhānapravr̥ttir na
yuktā. “[This is] not [correct], because prior to [matter’s] activity,
this [twofold benefit of the Person] does not exist: as long as matter
does not transform itself into the Great [i.e. the intellect], etc.,
there cannot be any perception of sound and so on, nor [can there be]
any perception that qualities and the Person are distinct. Therefore,
since this [so-called] cause [of the activity of matter] does not exist
[at that time], the activity of matter is impossible.” Note that this
argument is part of a dilemma; thus Uddyotakara adds (NV: 433-34):
athāsti nāsad ātmānaṁ labhate na san nirudhyata ity evaṁ ca sati
vidyamānaḥ puruṣārthaḥ pradhānaṁ pravartayatīti na puruṣārthā
pradhānasya pravr̥ttiḥ. na hi loke yad yasya bhavati sa tadarthaṁ punar
yatata iti. “But [if the Sāṁkhya opponent answers that in fact this
cause] is present [at that time, on the grounds] that what is
non-existent cannot obtain existence [and that] what exists cannot cease
[to exist], [we answer that] if it is the case, since the benefit of the
Person prompts matter to act [whereas it already] exists, the activity
of matter [can] not be for the benefit of the Person; for in the
[ordinary] world, one does not make again an effort to [achieve] a
benefit that is [already achieved].”

74 Thus in NV: 434, while arguing with other opponents who contend that
atoms controlled by individuals’ actions (rather than primordial nature)
are the cause of the universe, Uddyotakara comes back to the Sāṁkhya
assertion that unconscious matter can act and alludes to SK 57 (see
above, n 56): kṣīrādivad acetanasyāpi pravr̥ttir iti cet,
yathāpatyabharaṇārthaṁ kṣīrāder acetanasya pravr̥ttir evaṁ
paramāṇavo’cetanāḥ santaḥ puruṣārthaṁ pravartiṣyanta iti, tan na yuktaṁ
sādhyasamatvāt. “If [the opponent argues] that just as in the case of
milk, [something can] have an activity although it is unconscious, [i.e.
if he argues that] just as milk for instance, although unconscious, acts
so as to nourish an offspring, in the same way, atoms, which are
unconscious, must act for the benefit of the Person, [we answer that]
this is not correct, because of the [fault that this] is identical with
what is to be established (sādhyasama).”

75 Taber 1986: 128.

76 See the discussion in NV: 434, too long to be quoted here.

77 Thus, while defending the proof of īśvara’s existence as the
efficient cause of the universe, Bhāsarvajña argues that only conscious
entities can act (NBhūṣ: 447): cetanasyaiva hi kartr̥tvam. svatantro hi
kartety ucyate. śarīrādeś ca svātantryaṁ nāsti
puruṣābhiprāyānuvidhāyitvān mr̥taśarīrādeḥ kartr̥tvānupalambhāc ca. “For
agency belongs exclusively to [what is] conscious. For [we only] call
[something that is] independent an ‘agent’. And the body and so on have
no independence, because they conform to the intention of the person,
and because [we] do not observe that corpses for example have any
agency.” He then answers a Sāṁkhya objector who, relying on SK 57 (see
above, n 56), argues that agency can belong to conscious entities
“because an unconscious entity such as milk is seen to act
independently, for the purpose of making the calf grow”
(vatsādivivr̥ddhyartham acetanasya kṣīrādeḥ svātantryeṇa
pravr̥ttyupalambhāt, NBhūṣ: 447). According to Bhāsarvajña, this position
is refuted by inference as well as scripture: tathā hi loke 'pi
śāstraśilpādikāryaviśeṣaṁ dr̥ṣṭvā jñānaviśeṣaṁ tatkartur anumi­noti,
tajjñānarahitānāṁ cākartr̥tvam eveti. āgameṣv api vedasmr̥tipurāṇādiṣu
jñānina eva kartr̥tvaṁ śrūyate. vidvān yajeta ityādivacanād
dharmādikartr̥tvam api cetanasyaiveti. “To explain: in the world too,
upon seeing a particular effect such as a treatise or a work of art,
[we] infer that its agent must have a particular knowledge, whereas
those who are devoid of this knowledge cannot be the agents [of this
particular effect]. And in scriptures too, such as the Vedas, Smr̥ti,
Purāṇas and so on, it is stated that agency exclusively belongs to
[someone] who knows: through such words as ‘he who knows should
sacrifice’, the agency of dharma and so on also is ascribed solely to
the conscious.” The Sāṁkhya, however, objects (ibid.) that in fact this
agency belongs to that which is capable of knowledge, will and effort,
i.e. the intellect, which is a mere evolute of the insentient primordial
nature: nanu ca śāstraśilpādikartr̥tvaṁ jñānecchāprayatnavato
'cetanasyaiva buddhitattvasya, na tu cetanasyeti. “But it is [something]
unconscious, [namely] the principle of the intellect that possesses
knowledge, will and effort, which is the agent of such [effects] as a
treatise or a work of art and not [something] conscious [as you claim].”
Bhāsarvajña answers (ibid.) that only a conscious entity, i.e. the Self,
can be the substrate of knowledge, will and effort: tad idaṁ
mahāmohavijr̥mbhitaṁ yajjñānavān acetana iti. yo 'sau jñānecchādīnām
āśrayaḥ, sa eva hy ātmā, na tato 'nyaś cetano 'stīti vakṣyāmaḥ. “The
[notion] that the unconscious knows spreads from a great delusion; for
the substrate of knowledge, will and so on is nothing but the Self,
[and] we will explain that nothing is conscious apart from this [Self].”

78 While most Naiyāyikas consider that consciousness is only an
adventitious quality of the Self, Bhāsarvajña argues that the Self is by
nature conscious, and Abhinavagupta himself mentions with approval
Bhāsarvajña’s heterodox position in ĪPVV I: 134-35. See Ratié 2011a:
88-91.

79 See Krasser 2002: 157, which mentions a number of formal similarities
between the ĪS and the theistic argument attacked by the Kashmiri
Buddhist Śaṅkaranandana in the Īśvarāpākaraṇasaṁkṣepa, and suggests that
Śaṅkaranandana’s pūrvapakṣa might be at least in part based on
Utpaladeva’s work.

80 While conceding that Utpaladeva’s treatise “remains quite within the
Nyāya framework” (Taber 1986: 127), J. Taber considers that the ĪS’s
argument is “highly original in that it is unmistakably an argument from
design. The reason why God must have created the world is, for Utpala –
unlike for many Naiyāyikas – not simply because it is an artifact
(kāryatvāt), but because it is a very unusual kind of artifact which
only a conscious, intelligent being, to say the least, could have
produced.” Indeed, as emphasized by J. Taber, Utpaladeva keeps pointing
out the complexity and harmony of natural arrangements; nonetheless, as
seen above, the argument resting on the notion of a specific arrangement
(sanniveśaviśeṣa, etc.) is commonplace in Nyāya literature.

81 This hypothesis is mentioned in Taber 1986: 128: “Sāṁkhya could well
have represented to Utpala [. . .], as a system of materialism, a
challenge to his own mature theology. That theology consists in a system
of idealism in which Śiva as consciousness is the ultimate reality [. .
.]. The refutation of Sāṁkhya, then, does away [. . .] with a view of
the world in which consciousness has virtually no role.” In this
connection it should be noted that in ĪPK II.4.17-19, Utpaladeva refutes
at length the Sāṁkhya view of causality by showing that pradhāna can
transform itself into the universe only if it is a manifestation of the
ultimate consciousness.

82 ĪS 56: svātmaivāyaṁ sphurati sakalaprāṇinām īśvaro’ntaḥ kartā jñātāpi
ca yadi paraṁ pratyabhijñāsya sādhyā । sā cāsmābhir vihitaghaṭanānyatra
kiṁ tv īśasiddhir dvaite’py astīty ucitam adhikaṁ bhāti vahnir niśīthe
।।

83 ĪPK I.1.2: kartari jñātari svātmany ādisiddhe maheśvare । ajaḍātmā
niṣedhaṁ vā siddhiṁ vā vidadhīta kaḥ ।। “What sentient Self could
produce either the refutation or the demonstration [of the existence of]
the agent, the knowing subject, the Self that is always already
established, the Great Lord?” See also Torella 1994: 86 n 8.

84 Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta thus exploit Dharmakīrti’s famous
definition of the means of knowledge in PV, Pramāṇasiddhipariccheda 1ab
and 5c: pramāṇam avisaṁvādi jñānam . . . ajñātārthaprakāśo vā. “The
means of knowledge is a cognition that does not deceive [. . .] or the
manifestation of an object that was not known [so far].” (See Torella
1994: 161 n 2). The second part of the definition (in fact borrowed from
the Mīmāṁsakas: see Krasser 2001 and Kataoka 2003) is explicitly
included in Utpaladeva’s own definition of the means of knowledge (see
ĪPK II.3.1: the means of knowledge is a manifestation that “arises
[while being] new”, abhinavodayaḥ).

85 See Vr̥tti ad ĪPK I.1.2: 2 (svasaṁvedanasiddham aiśvaryam. “The fact
that one is the Lord (aiśvarya) is established through self-awareness”)
and Torella 1994: 86.

86 Thus, while commenting on ĪPK I.1.2ab (see above, n 83),
Abhinavagupta explains (ĪPV I: 32-33): saṁvid iti tūcyamānā
vikalpyatvena prameyatāṁ spr̥śantī sr̥ṣṭatvān na paramārthasaṁvid iti
vakṣyāmaḥ. kartā jñātā ca maheśvara ity abhidhāne’pi sa eva prakāra
āpated iti yathā yathā prameyabhūmikāpādananyakkārakalaṅkaparihāraḥ
śakyas tathā tathā yāvadgati yatitavyam iti bhūtavibhaktyā nirdeśaḥ
kr̥taḥ. upadeśāvasare hi sarvātmanā tāvat sā prameyatāsya parihartum
aśakyā. “But we will state [later] that the ‘consciousness’ of which
[people] talk as [if it were] a conceptual object (vikalpya) is not
consciousness in the ultimate sense (paramārtha), because [this
consciousness that] has the status of an object of knowledge (prameya)
is [merely] a created [object and not the creative subject]; and when
one mentions ‘the agent’ and ‘the knower’, [or] ‘the Great Lord’, the
same consequence must follow. Therefore, since [we] must strive as much
as possible to avoid the stain of debasing [this consciousness] by
letting it fall to the level of an object of knowledge, [Utpaladeva] has
expressed it with a case [i.e. the locative] that expresses an
accomplished state; for surely, when teaching, it is impossible to avoid
this objectification altogether.”

87 See ĪPV I: 20, where Abhinavagupta explains that the goal of the
treatise is not a cognition but a recognition (praty-abhijñā, where
praty- stands for pratīpam, “again”) for the following reason: pratīpam
iti svātmāvabhāso hi nābhūtapūrvo* ’vicchinnaprakāśatvāt tasya.
[*nābhūtapūrvo corr. (see Ratié 2011a: 27): nānanubhūtapūrvo —Bhāskarī,
KSTS]. “[It is a] re-[cognition], for the Self’s manifestation is not
[something] that did not exist before, since this [Self] is an
uninterrupted manifesting consciousness.”

88 See ĪPK I.1.3: kintu mohavaśād asmin dr̥ṣṭe ’py anupalakṣite ।
śaktyāviṣkaraṇeneyaṁ pratyabhijñopadarśyate ।। “However, since the
[Self], although perceived (dr̥ṣṭa), is not apprehended [as it really is]
(anupalakṣita) because of a delusion (moha), this recognition is shown
through making [the Self’s] powers obvious.”

89 See ĪPV I: 25; for analyses and translations, see Lawrence 2000:
50ff; Ratié 2009: 352 n 9.

90 As noted in Torella 1994: 173 n 33.

91 According to the Buddhist logicians to whom Utpaladeva borrows this
terminology, the svabhāvahetu inference does not establish the existence
of the thing itself (vastu) but only a particular usage (vyavahāra),
since the inference “this is a tree because this is a śiṁśapā” only
justifies the use of the word “tree” with respect to the object called
“śiṁśapā” (which designates a particular variety of tree) by relying on
some properties that the tree and the śiṁśapā share (such as having
branches). On Dharmottara’s statement that the svabhāvahetu inference
only establishes a vyavahāra, see Ratié 2007: 357 n 90. Cf. ĪPVV I: 87:
nanu ca siddhe vastuni yat pramāṇam, tat kila vyavahārasādhanam iti
prasiddham. “But it is well known that surely, the means of knowledge
with respect to an entity [the existence of which is already]
established [only] establishes a usage.”

92 See ĪPK II.3.17 (apravartitapūrvo ’tra kevalaṁ mūḍhatāvaśāt ।
śaktiprakāśeneśādivyavahāraḥ pravartyate ।। “It is only that manifesting
the powers [of the Self through the treatise] makes possible the usage
[of the terms] ‘Lord’, etc. which were not used before with respect to
this [Self] because of delusion” and Abhinavagupta’s commentaries
thereon (see Ratié 2011a: 729-39; 2013: 427-38).

93 ĪPVV I: 106 (see Ratié 2007: 363, n 101). In fact, in this passage
Abhinavagupta is describing the process through which we come to
recognize the existence of other conscious beings, but as shown in Ratié
(2007: 360ff.), this description is very close to his definition of the
Recognition of the Lord: according to Abhinavagupta, the recognition of
other individual conscious entities already involves the (partial)
realization of īśvara’s nature.

94 See ĪPVV III: 181: śabdavikalpa īśvaraḥ pramātā sarvaśaktir ātmaivety
upadeśāvasare vyavahārasādhanabalopanate śabdaiḥ prameyatāṁ nītasyāpi
paramārthaparāmarśe ’hantātmani viśrama iti. “In the verbal concept that
arises through establishing a usage (vyavahāra) when teaching that the
Lord, who is a knowing subject endowed with all powers, is the Self
itself, [that which is taught,] although transformed by words into an
object of knowledge, rests on the ultimate realization
(paramārthaparāmarśa), that is, [pure] subjectivity (ahantā).” For an
analysis of the role of subjectivity in the inferential process of
recognition, see Ratié 2011a: 734-39.

95 ĪPVV I: 40: īśvaro na vyavahārasādhanapramāṇamātraviṣayaḥ kathañcid
apy anavabhāsamānatvāt, na hīśvaro viśvatra kasyacit kadācid bhāsata ity
āśayenāha nanv iti. siddhasattākasyeti sattaiva na siddheti ca.
siddhatvam atra prakāśamānatvam. saiveti sattā sādhyā.
apūrvaprakāśanarūpaṁ tatra jñānaṁ yato bhavati, tādr̥k pramāṇaṁ
vaktavyam. tathā coddyotakarādaya* īśvarasiddhir ity evaṁ vyavahāram
akārṣuḥ. [*coddyotakarādaya corr.: coddyotakārādaya ĪPVV].

96 See ĪPVV III: 166: dūrabhuvanaviśeṣavr̥ttitvād
asmadādyadr̥śyatvādināpūrveṇāsmān praty
aprakāśamā-nenārthenāsahabhavanaśīlo ’sāv aiśvaryavyavahāraḥ svātmani
tathābhūtāpūrvarūpavirahiṇi viruddha iti yo vyāmohas tenautaprotahr̥dayaḥ
kathaṁ tathā vyavahāret. “How could [someone] adopt such a usage
(vyavahāret) [as ‘the Lord’ with respect to oneself] while having one’s
heart interwoven (otaprota) with this delusion: ‘This usage, “being the
Lord”, is contradictory with respect to the Self, [because] this
[expression “being the Lord”] is by nature incapable of denoting
something that never manifests itself as new to us, [i.e. something that
is always manifest]; since, for instance, [the Lord] is imperceptible
for [limited subjects] such as us due to its existing in some distant
particular world; [whereas the Self] is devoid of such a nature [, since
it is always already manifest to us].’”

97 See ĪPV I: 34 (commenting on ĪPK I.1.2cd, according to which no
“sentient Self” can prove or refute the Lord): ajaḍātmeti, yasya tu
vaiśeṣikāder jaḍa ātmā sa siddhiṁ karotv īśvaraviṣayām; anyas tu
sāṁkhyādir niṣedham; sāṁkhyo ’pi viṣayāvabhāsanarūpaṁ jñānaṁ
buddhidharmam icchann ātmānaṁ vastuto jaḍam evopaiti. na ca jaḍātmā
svātmany api durlabhaprakāśasvātantryaleśaḥ kiñcit sādhayituṁ niṣeddhuṁ
vā prabhaviṣṇuḥ pāṣāṇa iva. “[With the expression] ‘sentient Self’ [,
Utpaladeva means the following:] On the one hand, let the Vaiśeṣika[s]
and so on, for whom the Self is insentient, produce a proof of the Lord;
on the other hand, let other[s], such as the Sāṁkhya[s], [produce] a
refutation [of the Lord] – for even a Sāṁkhya, who considers knowledge,
which consists in manifesting an object, as a property of the intellect,
actually ends up making the Self insentient –; now, an insentient Self,
in which the faintest trace of manifesting consciousness (prakāśa) and
freedom cannot be found, does not have the power to prove or refute
anything, just like a stone!”

98 See ĪPK II.4.8: ata evāṅkure ’pīṣṭo nimittaṁ parameśvaraḥ ।
tadanyasyāpi bījāder hetutā nopapadyate ।। “For this very reason, [some]
consider the Highest Lord as the efficient cause (nimitta) of the sprout
as well; [but] nothing distinct from [him], such as the seed and so on,
can also be a cause.” Cf. ĪPV II: 145-46: yata evaṁ cetana eva nirmātā,
ata eva naiyāyikādibhir aṅkurādau buddhimān eva parameśvaro
hetutveneṣṭaḥ. nanu tair nimittakāraṇatāsyāṅgīkr̥tā
kriyāvibhāgādikramāyātaparamāṇvādidvārakatayā,
samavāyikāraṇanijāvayavārambhaparamparayā tu tata īśvarād anyasyāpi
bījabhūmijalāder hetutā kathitā. satyaṁ kathitā, sā tu nopapadyate,
uktayuktyā jaḍasya hetutāyogāt; tataś ceśvara eva
bījabhūmijalābhāsasāhityenāṅkurātmanā bhāsata itīyān atra paramārthaḥ.
“Since thus, only a conscious [entity] is a creator, for this very
reason the Naiyāyikas, etc. consider that the Highest Lord, who must be
intelligent (buddhimān), is the cause of the sprout and so on.
[­–Objection:] Granted, they admit that he is the efficient cause
(nimittakāraṇa) inasmuch as he is what enables the atoms, [atom dyads]
and so on to go through the succession (krama) of activities (kriyā),
disjunctions (vibhāga) and [conjunctions that lead to the formation of
the perceptible universe]. Nonetheless, [these Naiyāyikas, etc. also]
claim that [entities] such as the seed, earth, water and so on, although
distinct from the Lord, are [also] causes [of the sprout], because of
the series of combinations (ārambha) [of atom dyads and so on] that has
their own parts as an inherence cause (samavāyikāraṇa). [­– Answer:]
True; [they] claim [that other things are also causes]. But this [claim]
is not sound, because according to the reasoning that [we] have already
stated, the insentient cannot be a cause; and therefore it is the Lord
that manifests himself as the sprout accompanied by the manifestations
of the seed, earth and water; such only is the ultimate truth in this
regard.” Abhinavagupta is probably alluding here to the Vaiśeṣika theory
of cosmic creation. See PDhS: 48-49, which describes in the following
way the beginning of the universe: tataḥ punaḥ prāṇināṁ bhogabhūtaye
maheśvarasiskṣānantaraṁ sarvātmagatavttilabdhādṣṭāpekṣebhyas
tatsamyogebhyaḥ pavanaparamāṇuṣu karmotpattau teṣāṁ parasparasaṁyogebhyo
dvyaṇukādiprakrameṇa mahān vāyuḥ samutpanno nabhasi dodhūyamānas
tiṣṭhati. “Then, again, the Great Lord has a desire to create [the
universe] so as to [provide] living beings with a wealth of experiences;
immediately afterwards, after the arisal of an activity (karman) in the
atoms of air due to the conjunctions (saṁyoga) of these [atoms] that
depend on the unseen [force] (adṣṭa) which has started to operate
inside all the [individual’s] Selves, due to the mutual conjunctions of
these [atoms], through the succession of the atom dyads, etc. a great
wind comes to being, trembling in the sky.” However, oddly enough, in
the ĪPV, action is first, disjunction second, and conjunction only
appears implicitly with -ādi (“and so on”), whereas according to
Praśastapāda, conjunction is first and action is second. Bhāskarakaṇṭha
solves the problem by explaining that the sequence alluded to by
Abhinavagupta is the following (Bhāskarī II: 164): pūrvaṁ kriyā tato
vibhāgas tataḥ pūrvasaṁyoganivttis tata uttarasaṁyogotpādādiḥ. “First
activity, then disjunction, then the disappearance (nivtti) of the
previous conjunction, then the arising of the new conjunction.” In other
words, according to Bhāskarakaṇṭha, in fact, the succession alluded to
in the ĪPV starts earlier in the Vaiśeṣikas’ description of cosmic
activity, i.e. during the destruction of the universe, which begins with
an activity that leads to disjunctions down to the destruction of all
atomic combinations before the universe can begin again with new
conjunctions. See PDhS: 48: maheśvarecchātmāṇusaṁyogajakarmabhyaḥ
śarīrendriyakāraṇāṇuvibhāgebhyas tatsaṁyoganivttau teṣām āparamāṇvanto
vināśaḥ. “Due to the activities (karman) produced by the will of the
great Lord and the conjunctions of the atoms with the selves,
disjunctions (vibhāga) between the atoms that are the causes
[constituting] the bodies and sense-organs [occur, and] due to [these
disjunctions there is] a disappearance (nivtti) of the conjunctions
between [these atoms]; when [they have thus ceased], there is a
disappearance of these down to the atoms.”

99 My conjecture (below, n 100) as well as the additions in brackets in
the translation are only tentative and I might be misunderstanding this
passage. According to the edited text (tadadarśane’pi
tatkr̥tatvapratipattir ityādi), the objection examined here is: “even
though there is no perception of it, one understands that it is an
effect of that”, but given the way Abhinavagupta replies to it, it seems
to me that it should rather be an allusion to Dharmakīrti’s objection
that only a particular conscious agent can be inferred from a particular
arrangement when their invariable concomitance has first been
ascertained. I am assuming that this objection is the quotation of the
beginning of a sentence in Utpaladeva’s lost Vivr̥ti, but this might
rather be a quotation from some other text that I have failed to
identify.

100 ĪPVV III: 192: saty apīśvare kāraṇe tato ’nyasyāpīśvarād atiriktasya
jaḍasya yā hetutā tair upagatā, sā na saṁbhavaty aprekṣāpūrvakāriṇa iti.
sanniveśo hi nāma sajātīyavijātīyatāvibhāgotthāpako ghaṭaśarāvakuṇḍādau
mr̥dupādānasaṁbhāvī saṁbhūyaniviṣṭatārūpaś cidrūpakārya ity ekavāram
avalokite sarvatra sanniveśena tathaiva bhāvyam ity ekānta evāyam. yat
tūcyate taddarśane ’pi* tatkr̥tatvapratipattir ity ādi tat
svadr̥ṣṭipakṣapātavyāmohavyāhr̥taṁ dhūme ’pi samānatvād asyety alam
avāntareṇa. etad dhi granthakāreṇaiva vitānitam īśvarasiddhau, iha tv
eṣa paramārtha īśvara eva niyatiśaktiṁ nijām anurundhāno
bījabhūmijalābhāsapuraḥsarīkāreṇāṅkurātmānaṁ svacche svaprakāśe
nirbhāsayatīti. [*taddarśane ’pi conj. (see above, n 99): tadadarśane
’pi ĪPVV].

101 See Taber 1986: 129-30: “It is well known that Naiyāyikas were, as a
rule, Śaivas; Jayanta and Bhāsarvajña, the two major Naiyāyikas closest
to Utpala in time and place, were outspokenly so. And it is evident that
Utpala received formal training in Nyāya at the hands of Naiyāyikas, so
skilfully does he handle Nyāya principles. Thus, one might reasonably
hypothesize that Utpala developed his theology in connection with
reflection on the Nyāya system. While he retained the theism of the
Nyāya — indeed Śiva in Utpala’s system is not the featureless, inactive
Absolute of Advaita Vedānta but a vital, personal, absolute Deity — he
came, ultimately, to reject its realism, due to the impression made upon
him by the Mahāyāna Buddhists, among others. Thus, the treatment of
problems regarding the existence of God from strictly within the
framework of Nyāya would not have been just an intellectual exercise for
Utpala. Rather, it would have been partly an expression of convictions
which were, at least at one stage, central to his thought and which
played an important role in the development of his mature system.”

102 See Torella 1992.

103 Taber 1986: 129.

104 ĪPV I: 25: naiyāyikakramasyaiva māyāpade pāramārthikatvam iti
granthakārābhiprāyaḥ.

105 On the “inclusivistic hierarchy” of Śaiva non-dualism, see Hanneder
1998: 6ff.

106 Torella 1994: xxi.

107 Torella 1994: xxii (cf. the remark in Taber 1986: 129, quoted above,
n 101). Torella adds: “It is probably for this reason that we see Utpala
assuming a Naiyāyika guise in the ĪS.”

108 Torella 1994: xxi n 25.

109 See Sanderson 1985: 203.

110 On its date, see Goodall 1998: xlvii-lxxvi.

111 KT III.11cd-12: vyāpāro na ca dr̥śyate kāryam icchā pratīyate ।।
sthūlaṁ vicitrakaṁ kāryaṁ nānyathā ghaṭavad bhavet । asti hetur ataḥ
kaścit karma cen na hy acetanam ।। “And [although] the [Lord’s cosmic]
activity is not perceived, [its] effects [are, so that his creative]
will is known. [The universe,] which is coarse [and] diverse, is an
effect, just as a pot — it could not be otherwise. Therefore [it] must
have some cause; if [one says that this cause] is [past] action[s], [the
answer to this is:] no, for [past actions are] unconscious.” See Goodall
1998: 273-78.

112 On its date, see Goodall 2004: xxxv-lviii.

113 The inference itself is formulated as follows (PT II.2-3): mūrtāḥ
sāvayavā ye ’rthā nānārūpaparicchadāḥ । sthūlāvayavaśiṣṭatvād
buddhimaddhetupūrvakāḥ ।। ato ’sti buddhimān kaścid īśvaraḥ
samavasthitaḥ । pratipannaḥ svakāryeṇa dr̥ṣṭenātrānumānataḥ ।। “The
material things that have parts [and] are endowed with various forms
presuppose an intelligent cause, because they are particularized by
gross [i.e. perceptible] parts. Therefore there is some intelligent
[cause] that is established [to be] the Lord. In this [system he is]
known through an inference from his perceived effect.” See Goodall 2004:
165-66.

114 See Goodall 2001: 332-33; 2004: xlix-l.

115 See the objection in PT 2.4: kāryakāraṇasambandho na gr̥hīto yatas
tayoḥ । tena tatkāraṇābhāvān na khyāpyaṁ kāryadarśanam ।। “Since [we] do
not perceive the relation of cause and effect between the [Lord] and the
[universe, and] since therefore there is no [known] cause of this
[universe,] one cannot say that the effect is perceived [, since we do
not know whether the universe is an effect].” (See Goodall 2004: 166.)
The objection is answered mainly by arguing that the Lord is inferred
through a necessary assumption (arthāpatti) defined as a sāmānyato
dr̥ṣṭam reasoning, i.e. as an inference that shows the necessity of the
Lord’s existence (conceived as an intelligent cause in general) from the
impossibility of accounting for its effect otherwise. See PT 2.9ab and
11: arthāpattir iyaṁ proktā mānaṁ sāmānyadarśikā ।. . . tena sāmānyato
dr̥ṣṭād anumānena buddhimān । kāraṇaṁ sthūlakāryasya kṣitikāryādikasya
saḥ ।। “This necessary assumption [through which one also infers the
imperceptible causality of past actions] is proclaimed [to be] a [valid]
means of knowledge that demonstrates a generality (sāmānya) [. . .].
Therefore this [Lord, who is an] intelligent [entity, is known] through
an inference from [what is] apprehended as a generality (sāmānyato
dr̥ṣṭāt) [as] the cause of the coarse effect [that is the universe, i.e.]
first, the effect that is the earth [, etc.]” See Goodall 2004: 169.

116 See PT 2.12: kṣiter evaṁvidhaṁ rūpaṁ na kadācid anīdr̥śam । tanvādeḥ
kāraṇaṁ karma kalpitena matena kim ।। “The form of the earth is as [we
now see it and] was never otherwise; [as for] the cause of bodies and so
on, it is [past] action[s]; [so] what is the point of [this] artificial
theory [about the Lord]?” (See Goodall 2004: 169-70.) As in the KT, the
answer is mainly that because the universe is coarse (sthūla), it is an
effect built by an intelligent agent, so that karman, which is
unconscious, can only be an instrument of that intelligent agent. See PT
2.13ab (yad yat sthūlaṁ bhaved vastu kr̥takaṁ tad viniścitam । “Whatever
entity is coarse is established to be constructed”) and PT 2.16:
buddhimāṁs tena kartāsau tanvādīnām iha sthitaḥ । tan no hetur bhavet
karma kiṁ tadyojitaṁ bhavet ।। “Therefore this intelligent agent of
bodies and so on is established [to exist] here; so [past] action[s]
cannot be the cause [of bodies and so on;] rather, [they] must be
[instruments] used by this [cause].” See Goodall 2004: 170-71.

117 PT 2.29-30: nimitttam īśvarākhyaṁ yat tad dr̥ṣṭaṁ sahakāraṇam ।
upādānaṁ ca yat sūkṣmaṁ sarvakāryeṣu saṁhitam । kāraṇānāṁ trayaṁ tena
sarvakārye’numīyate । yato na janakaṁ caikaṁ sāmagrī janikā bhavet ।
nimittakāraṇaṁ tena kartā sa parameśvaraḥ ।। “The efficient cause is
[what is] called ‘Lord’; the auxiliary cause is what is seen [, such as
the potter’s stick, wheel and so on]; and the material cause is subtle
[matter]. [These] three causes are connected with all effects; therefore
[they] are [legitimately] inferred with respect to the effect that is
the universe. And since one [of them] cannot produce [it on its own],
[it is] this set [of causes] that must produce [it]; therefore the
efficient cause is the agent [who is] the Highest Lord.” (See Goodall
2004: 174-78.)

118 See above, n 115.

119 See PT 2.62cd-65ab: sarvajñaḥ sarvakartr̥tvād yatas taj jñānapūrvakam
।। sādhanāṅgaphalaiḥ sārdhaṁ vetti sarvam idaṁ tataḥ । yathā
tantvādivitkartā viṣayīkr̥tya tāni saḥ ।। tasmin pravartate kārye tadvat
tasmin paraḥ śivaḥ । sarvakr̥tyeṣu tajjñānaṁ vyāpitaṁ yena sānvayam ।।
nikhilajñānayogitvāt sarvajñaḥ parameśvaraḥ । “[This Lord] is
omniscient, because [he] is omnipotent, since the [power to act]
presupposes knowledge. Therefore he knows all the [universe] along with
the means [of accomplishing it, its] parts and [its] fruits. Just as an
agent who knows the threads and [whatever is required to make a cloth]
engages in the activity (kārya) [of weaving] after taking these [things]
as the object [of his thought], in the same way, the Highest Śiva
[engages in cosmic activity after taking the universe as the object of
his thought]. Since the knowledge of the [things required so as to
create] is invariably found to be present in all activities (kr̥tya), the
Highest Lord is omniscient, because he [must] know everything.” (See
Goodall 2004: 185-86.)

120 See Rāmakaṇṭha’s lengthy commentary in KV ad KT III.11cd-12 and
Goodall 1998: 273-78. Later commentators also tend to forcibly read the
inference in scriptures that do not mention them. See Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha’s
MTṬ on MT, Vidyāpāda 2.3-4 (which does not mention the Nyāya inference
but merely states that the fivefold cosmic activity and its effects must
belong to the Lord who is “established by his own nature”,
svabhāvasiddha), p. 54: etac ca na māyādibhiḥ karmabhir vā nirvartayituṁ
śakyam ācaitanyāt, nāpi puruṣeṇāsya malaniruddhaśaktitvāt. na
cānīśvaro’tra kartā yuktaḥ. yaś caitat sr̥ṣṭyādi kartuṁ śaknoti,
so’vaśyaṁ tadviṣayajñaś cikīrṣitakāryaviṣayāṇāṁ jñānaviśeṣāṇām aṁśenāpi
vaikalye tattatkāryāniṣpatteḥ. ataś ca sarvakartrā sarvajñena tena ca
svabhāvasiddhena jagataḥ kartrā bhavitavyam. “And this [fivefold cosmic
activity of creation, maintenance, destruction, obscuration and grace]
cannot be performed by matter (māyā), for instance, nor by [past]
actions (karman), because [these] are unconscious, nor by the individual
(puruṣa), because his powers are restrained by the stain (mala) [that
binds him in saṁsāra]. Nor can this [fivefold activity] have an agent
that would not be a Lord, and he who can perform this [fivefold activity
of] creation and so on necessarily knows the object of this [activity],
because if the particular knowledges regarding the effects that one
wants to create are lacking, even in part, it is impossible to bring
about this or that [particular] effect. And as a consequence, there must
be an agent of the world who is omnipotent and omniscient, and therefore
[, as the scripture states here,] ‘established by its own nature’.” (See
Hulin 1980: 58ff.) See also Aghoraśiva’s TSṬ: 103: ataś ca jagataḥ
sanniveśādimattvena kāryatvāt tatkartr̥tayeśvarasiddhir iti bhāvaḥ. etena
prakr̥tikarmapuruṣeśvaravādino ’pi nirastāḥ, prakr̥tikarmaṇor acetanatvāt
puruṣasya ca samalatvenāsvavaśatvāt. “And therefore, because the world
is an effect in so far as it possesses a [specific] arrangement, etc.,
the Lord is established to be its agent — this is the implicit idea.
This also refutes those who say that the Lord [presiding over the
universe is in fact] primordial nature, [past] actions or individuals,
because primordial nature and [past] actions are unconscious, and the
individual does not act independently due to the stain (mala) [that
binds him].”

121 See Sanderson 2006.

122 Torella 1994: xxii.

123 For a summary and analysis of this chapter, see Hannotte 1987:
238-338.

124 Hannotte 1987: 245.

125 Note, however, that Sadyojyotis does not use the term sanniveśa
(arrangement) whereas his commentator Rāmakaṇṭha (who is posterior to
Utpaladeva) does. On the proof that Sadyojyotis defends, see NP II.1ab
(kṣmādeḥ sāvayavatvena kumbhavat kāryatā matā । “The earth and so on are
known to be effects, because they have parts, just as a pot”), NP II.3
(upādānādi tasyeṣṭaṁ vimatiḥ kartr̥kārake । ataḥ sa sādhyate ’smābhis
tatkartā śaṅkaraḥ sphuṭam ।। “The material cause (upādāna) and
[auxiliary causes] of this [effect] are admitted [by all, but] there is
a disagreement as regards the factor of action that is the agent
(kartr̥); therefore we demonstrate that the agent of this [effect] is
clearly Śaṅkara” and NP II.4ac (adr̥ṣṭakartr̥kāyādikāryaṁ prajñāvatā kr̥tam
। kumbhavat . . . “The effect [constituted by] bodies and so on, the
agent of which is not perceived, [must be] produced by an intelligent
[agent], as in the case of a pot.”). Cf. NPP: 117-18: yad yat kāryaṁ tat
tad viśiṣṭajñānakriyāyuktakartr̥pūrvaṁ dr̥ṣṭaṁ yathā ghaṭādi, kāryaṁ ca
tanukaraṇabhuvanādy adr̥ṣṭakartr̥kaṁ sarvam eva jagat pratipāditam, tasmād
idam api* viśiṣṭajñānakriyātmakakartr̥pūrvakaṁ siddham iti yas tasya
kartā sa parameśvaraḥ siddhaḥ. [*idam api conj.: api NPP]. “[We] observe
that whatever is an effect, such as a pot for instance, presupposes an
agent endowed with a particular knowledge and action, and the whole
universe, [i.e.] bodies, organs, worlds and so on, is an effect the
agent of which is not perceived. Therefore this [universe] too is
established to presuppose an agent characterized by a particular
knowledge and action, so its agent is established to be the Highest
Lord.”

126 See NP II.5ab: dhīmatkr̥taṁ tu yat kāryaṁ dr̥ṣṭaṁ tasyaiva darśanāt ।
dhīmato’numitir yuktā dehāder na viparyayāt ।। “[­–Objection:] But only
the inference of an intelligent [agent] from the perception of an effect
that is seen to be produced by an intelligent [agent] is legitimate,
[whereas the inference of an intelligent agent] from the body and so on
is not, because [the body and so on are] not thus [seen to be effects of
an intelligent agent]. Cf. NPP: 122: yad eva hi yasya kāryatvena siddhaṁ
tad eva tasyānumāpakaṁ na kāryamātram . . . “For only that which is
established to be an effect enables [us] to infer this [intelligent
agent, and] not an effect in general (kāryamātra) . . . .” Rāmakaṇṭha
explicitly ascribes this objection to “the Buddhists” (saugata, ibid.)
and quotes PV, Pramāṇasiddhipariccheda 11-13 (on which see above, nn
22-23) and 15.

127 NP II.6: kāryatvād eva kumbhāder dehādi* na vilakṣaṇam । kāryaṁ ca
na kvacid dr̥ṣṭaṁ prajñāvatkāraṇaṁ vinā ।। [*dehādi conj.: dehādir NP].
“The body, etc., are not different from the pot, etc. in so far as (eva)
they are effects; and no effect is ever seen [to exist] without an
intelligent cause.”

128 See the summary in Hannotte 1987: 273-88. Rāmakaṇṭha argues in
particular that the Buddhists too acknowledge that some things share
common features in so far as they are of the same sort (sajātīya) even
though in other respects they may be said to be of a different sort
(vijātīya): compare for instance the discussion in NPP: 126 (too long to
be quoted here) with ĪS: 8 (quoted above, n 33).

129 See NP 7: na ca yadvyaktisaṁbaddhā vyaktir yaiveha saṁmatā । tasyā
evānumānaṁ syāt punas tadupalabdhitaḥ ।। “And [if] inference [were aimed
at establishing] only the [particular] individual entity (vyakti) to
which the individual entity that is considered in this [particular case
as an effect] is linked, [it] could not take place again [with respect
to any other subject of inference, nor could it take place in the case
of this particular individual entity itself,] because this [individual
entity] would [already] be perceived.” Cf. NPP: 128: yady evam,
sakalasajātīyavijātīyavyāvr̥ttena svalakṣaṇenaivāgnyādinā mahānasādau
dhūmādeḥ svalakṣaṇasyaiva pratibandhaḥ siddhaḥ, tasya cānanuyāyitvān na
dharmyantare ’numānaṁ sambhavati nāpi tatraiva pratyakṣasiddher
anumānāyogād iti nivr̥ttedānīm anumānavārttā. “If it were the case,
[inference could] establish only the relation of a particular
(svalakṣaṇa) such as a smoke in e.g. the kitchen with a[nother]
particular such as a fire [in that kitchen], to the exclusion of any
[other entity] of the same kind or of another kind; and because no
[other entity] could conform to this [singular fire, this] inference
would not be possible with respect to any other subject of inference
[such as a distant hill above which one can see smoke], nor [would it be
possible] in that very case [of the kitchen], because inference would
not apply, since [its object] would [already] be established through
perception, so that this [whole] business of inference would immediately
be reduced to naught.” In his commentary, Rāmakaṇṭha repeatedly puts
forward the argument already mentioned by Jayanta that generality is
necessary in the inferential process, otherwise one could never infer
the presence of fire on a mountain thanks to the knowledge of the
concomitance between a particular fire and a particular smoke observed
in a kitchen. See NPP: 134: vahnyādir api parvatasambandhī mahānasādāv
adr̥ṣṭatvān na dhūmādinā sādhya iti sarvānumānābhāvaprasaṅgaḥ. “[In that
case] the fire belonging to a mountain too, for instance, could not be
established thanks to, e.g. [the presence of] smoke, since it is not
seen, e.g. in a kitchen, so that as a consequence no inference at all
could occur.”

130 In NP II.8-12; see Hannotte 1987: 289ff; Goodall 2004: 185 n 158. In
his introduction ad NP II.8, Rāmakaṇṭha quotes ŚV,
Sambandhākṣepaparihāra 80, and in his commentary ad NP II.9, he quotes
ŚV, Sambandhākṣepaparihāra 79 (both verses are also quoted in the ĪS:
see above, n 19).

131 See NPP: 135: nanu pakṣadharmatābalān niyatasya dhūmasya grahaṇān
niyato vahniḥ pratīyate. “But due to the fact that the subject of the
inference has a [specific] property (pakṣadharmatābalāt), because one
grasps a specific smoke, one grasps a specific fire [as its cause].”
After showing that the Buddhists themselves should admit this thesis
since it is not contradictory with their own principles, Rāmakaṇṭha
concludes (ibid.): yady evam ihāpy apratiṣṭhitabhedaḥ kāryaviśeṣa eva
kartr̥viśeṣavyāptaḥ siddha iti tanukaraṇabhuvanādeḥ kāryātmano* ’rthasya
śaktyā tatkartur api viśiṣṭasya svakāryaviṣayam
amalatvasarvajñatvecchāmātrakartr̥tvādy apīśvaratvaṁ siddhyati
[*kāryātmano corr.: karyātmano NPP]. “Since it is so, in this [case of
the inference of the Lord] as well, it is a particular effect that is
established to be invariably concomitant with a particular agent,
[although this particular effect] is not established to be different
[from the pot in so far as it too is an effect]. Therefore its agent
too, who is particularized [as the agent producing] through [his] power
an object that is an effect such as bodies, organs, worlds and so on, is
established to be stainless [and] omniscient [and] to create through
mere will (icchāmātra) and so on [; i.e. it is established] to be the
Lord, [since these properties] correspond to his own [particular]
effect.”

132 See above, nn 29, 43 and 48.

133 This stress on the Sāṁkhya objection may be due at least in part to
the fact that the cosmology of Śaiva scriptures has borrowed from
Sāṁkhya a number of doctrinal elements (such as the cosmic evolution
through a scale of tattvas): on the importance of the Sāṁkhya tradition
in Śaiva literature, see Torella 1999.

134 See NP 14ff.

135 NP 14ab: bījakarmāṇubhiḥ kecid atrāhuḥ siddhasādhyatām । “With
respect to this [inference of the Lord,] some claim that what is to be
established [, i.e. that the universe has an agent,] is [in fact
already] established thanks to primordial nature (bīja), [past] actions
and individuals.” Cf. NPP:139: jagataḥ kartr̥pūrvakatvaṁ hi bhavadbhiḥ
sādhyate, sa copādānakāraṇatayā bījaśabdavācyaḥ pradhānākhyaḥ siddha
eva, tat kiṁ sādhyata iti sāṁkhyāḥ. “For the Sāṁkhyas [object the
following:] ‘You are endeavouring to demonstrate the fact that the
universe presupposes an agent; now, [what] is called matter [and]
expressed [here] by the word bīja is already established as the material
cause; therefore what [remains] to be demonstrated?’” Rāmakaṇṭha
ascribes the two other positions to the Mīmāṁsakas and Lokāyatas
(ibid.).

136 NP 14cd: na pūrvābhyāṁ viśiṣṭatvād dhiyā sādhyasya sā bhavet ।।
“[What is to be established] cannot be [already established] thanks to
the first two [afore-mentioned causes, i.e. primordial nature or past
actions,] because what is to be established is particularized by
consciousness.”

137 NP 15cd: nācaitanyāt pravr̥ttiḥ syāt svātantryād bījakarmaṇām ।।
“Primordial nature and [past] actions could not have any activity
[arising] independently (svātantryāt), because [they] are unconscious.”

138 NP 16a: payovac cet . . . “If [the opponent replies that primordial
nature can have an activity although it is insentient,] as in the case
of milk . . .” Rāmakaṇṭha stipulates (NPP:142) that this is an allusion
to SK 57 (on which see above, n 56).

139 See above, n 74.

140 NP 16b: na sādhyatvān mr̥ddaṇḍāder adarśanāt । “[We answer:] no,
because [the ability of unconscious entities to act] remains to be
established, since one does not observe that clay, the stick and [other
unconscious items used by a potter for instance are capable of acting
independently].”

141 NP16cd: aṅgāṅgitvaṁ ca sattvādeḥ svābhāvyān noktahetutaḥ ।। “And the
fact that [the three qualities, i.e.] sattva, [rajas and tamas,] serve
each other (aṅgāṅgitva) is not due to their nature, for the reason
[already] stated.” Cf. NPP: 143: acetanatvād eva teṣāṁ na svabhāvataḥ
parasparopakāraḥ, kintu pradīpādivad eva cetanakartr̥prayuktānām iti
nācetanasya kartr̥tvasiddhiḥ. “And precisely because they are
unconscious, they do not serve each other by nature; rather, just as in
the case of lamps for instance, [the qualities serve each other only] if
they are used by a conscious agent; therefore the agency of what is
unconscious is not established.”

142 NP 17ab: sthitvā kriyā ca bījasya nācitaś cetanaṁ vinā । “Besides,
primordial nature, which is unconscious, cannot act after being inactive
(sthitvā) without a conscious [entity that prompts it to do so].”

143 NP 17c: nanu jñānaṁ pradhāne’sti . . .

144 See NPP: 143: pradhānakāryasya buddher jñānābhyupagamāt pradhānam
api jñānātmakaṁ siddhyatīti kim anyad anumīyate. “Since [we Sāṁkhyas]
admit that the intellect, which is an effect of matter, possesses
knowledge, matter too is established to consist of knowledge; therefore
why infer some other [knowing entity]?” Rāmakaṇṭha refers (ibid.) to SK
23 (on which see above, n 64).

145 NP 17cd: nācaitanān mr̥dādivat ।। “No, because [the intellect too] is
unconscious, just as clay and so on.”

146 NP 18ab: astu vā śaktirūpatvād agrāhi tad asatsamam । “Or [if the
Sāṁkhya opponent explains that] the [intellect endowed with knowledge]
must exist [in primordial nature], because it consists of a potentiality
(śakti) [within matter], [we reply that since] it does not grasp [its
own knowledge by itself], this [principle of the intellect] is as good
as non-existent. Cf. NPP: 144: tathābhūtam api tat pradhāne kāraṇātmani
na vyaktam, api tu śaktyātmanāvasthitam ity adhyavasāyātmanaḥ
svakāryasyākaraṇād asatsamam. tataś cādhyavasāyātmano ’pi jñānasyābhāvān
nāsya kartr̥tvam iti kartrantarasiddhiḥ. “[If the Sāṁkhya explains that]
although [the principle of the intellect] is thus [i.e. endowed with
knowledge], it is not manifest in matter, which is [its material] cause;
rather, it exists [only] as a potentiality, [we reply that then this
principle of the intellect] is as good as non-existent, since it does
not produce its own effect, i.e. determination (adhyavasāya). And as a
consequence, since [matter] possesses no knowledge, even in the form of
determination, it is not an agent, so that it is etablished that [there
is] another agent.”

147 NP 18cd-19ab: sthitvā vyāpriyamāṇatvāc chambhor api pareraṇaṁ ।।
naivaṁ* bījasya no sāmyaṁ prajñāvān īśvaro yataḥ ।। [*naivaṁ conj.: navā
NP] “[­Objection:] “[According to you, it is] not [true] that the Lord
himself is prompted to act by something else because it acts after
remaining inactive; [so] in the same way, [it is not true that]
primordial nature is prompted to act by something else. [­Answer:] there
is no similarity [between the Lord and primordial nature,] since
[contrary to primordial nature], the Lord is conscious.”

148 NP 19cd-21ab: anekaṁ devadattādi dr̥ṣṭaṁ loke dhiyānvitam ।। sthitvā
pravartamānaṁ hi pākādāv apareritam । pareritam apīty asmāt saṁśayo na
maheśvare ।। upariṣṭād yato devaṁ vakṣyāmo’tiśayāṅkitam । “For in the
world, [we] observe that many [entities] endowed with consciousness,
such as Devadatta, when performing [the act of] cooking for instance
after being inactive, are not prompted [to do so] by anything else; [if
you object] that [sometimes they] are also prompted [to do so] by
something else, [we answer that] for this reason there is no doubt as
regards the Great Lord, since later we will explain that the Lord is
characterized by an absolute [power] (atiśaya).”

149 This doctrinal feature has often been pointed out with respect to
Śaiva non-dualism (see Bronkhorst 1996b), but as noted in Watson 2006:
90-91, Utpaladeva shares it with the Saiddhāntikas.

150 As noted in Sanderson 2006: 45, MTṬ: 30-31 on MT, Vidyāpāda 1.1,
quotes ĪS 55 (samujjvalannyāyasahasrasādhito ’py upaiti siddhiṁ na
vimūḍhacetasām । maheśvaraḥ pāṇitalasthito ’pi san palāyate daivahatasya
sanmaṇiḥ ।। “Even though he may be demonstrated by innumerable,
blazing[ly clear] reasonings, the Great Lord is not proved for those
whose mind is confused; although this authentic gem stands in the palm
of one’s hand, it escapes the ill-fated.”

151 See Sanderson 1985: 204-05; 1988: 692; 1995: 20-21; 2007: 376;
Torella 1994: xxi; Hanneder 1998: 6ff.

152 See the brief remarks in Dyczkowski 1987: 19-20; 1992: 33.

153 Torella 1994: xxi.

154 Ibid.: xxi-xxii. See also Torella 2008: 516.

155 See ĪPK I.5.7: cidātmaiva hi devo ’ntaḥsthitam icchāvaśād bahiḥ ।
yogīva nirupādānam arthajātaṁ prakāśayet ।। “For the Lord, who consists
of nothing but consciousness, must manifest externally all objects that
[actually remain] internal [to him] by virtue of his will, without any
material cause, just as a yogin.” The yogin’s creation recurs in ĪPK
II.4.10, where Utpaladeva specifies again that it is devoid of material
cause: yoginām api mr̥dbīje vinaivecchāvaśena tat । ghaṭādi jāyate tat
tat sthirasvārthakriyākaram ।। “This [production] also occurs by virtue
of the will of yogins, without any [material cause] such as clay [for a
pot] or a seed [for a sprout]; various [objects,] such as a pot and so
on, arise [thus while] having an efficiency of their own and while
lasting [just as ordinary objects].” On the special powers which, in the
Yoga tradition, enable yogins to create objects out of mere will, see
YBh: 165, which describes the last three members of a list of eight
yogic “perfections” (siddhi) in the following way: vaśitvaṁ
bhūtabhautikeṣu vaśī bhavaty avaśyaś cānyeṣām. īśittvaṁ teṣāṁ
prabhavāpyayayvyūhānām īṣṭe. yatrakāmāvasāyitvaṁ* satyasaṅkalpatā yathā
saṁkalpas tathā bhūtapraktīnām avasthānam. [*yatrakāmāvasāyitvaṁ corr.:
yatra kāmāvasāyitvaṁ YBh.] “Mastery [is the perfection of a yogin who]
is the master of elements and their products and is not [himself]
mastered by others; sovereignty [is the perfection of a yogin who] is
sovereign upon the production, disappearance and arrangement of the
[elements and their products; and] the determination [of things]
according to one’s desire [is the perfection of a yogin when] what [he]
fancies becomes real (satyasaṅkalpa); [i.e.,] it is the determination of
the material causes of elements according to one’s fancy.” On God’s
cosmic activity compared to this yogic creation in the Pratyabhijñā
treatise, see Alper 1979; Ratié 2010; 2011a: 403-41.

156 ŚD 1.44-45ab: yoginām icchayā yadvan nānārūpopapattitā । na cāsti
sādhanaṁ kiñcin mr̥dādīcchāṁ vinā prabhoḥ ।। tathā bhagavadicchaiva
tathātvena prajāyate । “Just as various forms can arise by the will of
yogins, and [in such cases] there is no means [of producing them] such
as clay, etc. apart from the Lord’s will, in the same way, it is the
Lord’s will that arises as being such [i.e. in the form of the
universe].” See Nemec 2011: 143. See also ŚD 3.35-37 (and Nemec 2011:
236-37) as well as ŚDV ad loc: 112: na hy asau yogī svātmano
mtpiṇḍasyeva śivikastūpakādirūpavikārapariṇāmakrameṇa* kumbhakāra iva
ghaṭam iva bhāvamaṇḍalaṁ janayaty api tu yasya yādśīcchā
tatsamanantaram eveṣṭakāryātmābhilāṣātmatayā sthitiḥ, tathā cidātmano
’pi. [* śivikastūpakādirūpavikārapariṇāmakrameṇa corr.:
śibikastūpakādirūpavikārapariṇāmakrameṇa ŚDV:
śibistūpakādirūpavikārapariṇāmakrameṇa em. Nemec 2011]. “For the yogin
does not produce all [objective] entities as a potter [produces] a pot,
through a process of transformation [of the clay involving various]
changes of form such as [the ones called] śivika, stūpaka, etc.; rather,
whatever is [the object] of such a will [as the yogin’s] immediately
exists while having as its nature [the yogin’s] desire, [i.e.] while
consisting in the desired effect; and the same goes for [the Lord] whose
nature is consciousness.” According to Nemec 2011: 368, śibikastūpaka
should be amended into śibistūpaka, and the latter designates (ibid.:
237 and n 177) a “small stūpa of the King of Śibi”, i.e. the character
of a famous jātaka; but the reason why such a character should appear in
this particular context (that of a potter making various forms with
clay) remains unclear. Nemec tries to explain it by stating that in
memory of King Śibi’s sacrifice a “beautifully adorned stūpa” was
erected and that “the present example thus serves to suggest that what
is made from the clay is a thoroughly intricate and ornate object, one
requiring much detailed work on the part of the sculptor”. However, the
technical terms śivika and stūpaka often occur in Abhinavagupta’s works,
where they obviously designate not one but two distinct things that have
nothing to do with the Buddhist jātaka — namely, two different states of
the clay being modelled by the potter who is in the process of making a
pot. See Bhāskarī I: 116: stūpakaḥ — ghaṭanirmāṇārtham upāttasya
mtpiṇḍasya kulālena prathamaṁ kriyamāṇo racanāviśeṣaḥ. śivikaḥ —
unnatavasturūpo racanāviśeṣaḥ. “The stūpaka is a specific arrangement
that the potter first makes with a lump of clay [thus] shaped in order
to create a pot. The śivika is [also] a specific arrangement consisting
in [the same] thing [but] tall[er].” In other words, Utpaladeva is
emphasizing here that contrary to a potter’s creation, which must
undergo various stages before reaching its final state, the yogin’s
creation is immediately complete because it is nothing but the yogin’s
will taking this or that particular form.

157 Thus according to Praśastapāda (PDhS: 46), God creates the universe
by putting atoms together so as to form a cosmic egg, and this
conjunction of atoms results “from the Great Lord’s mere will”
(maheśvarasyābhidhyānamātrāt) (cf. Vyomavatī, p. 301, which glosses
abhidhyāna with the word icchā). See Chemparathy 1968: 72, 81-83;
Bronkhorst 1996a: 286-87. Kumārila attacks this conception in ŚV,
Sambandhākṣepaparihāra 81-82ab: kulālavac ca naitasya vyāpāro yadi
kalpyate । acetanaḥ katham bhāvas tadicchām anurudhyate ।। tasmān na
paramāṇvāder ārambhaḥ syāt tadicchayā । “And if [you] do not conceive
the activity of this [Lord] as [that of] the potter, how can an
unconscious entity conform to his will? Therefore the atoms and so on do
not cling together by virtue of his will.” (See Krasser 1999: 220-21.)
The idea is also found in the Nyāya. See NMĪS: 103, where Jayanta
answers Kumārila’s objection by explaining: jñānacikīrṣāprayatnayogitvaṁ
kartr̥tvam ācakṣate. tac ceśvare vidyata evety uktam etat.
svaśarīrapreraṇe ca dr̥ṣṭam aśarīrasyāpy ātmanaḥ kartr̥tvam. “[We] observe
that being an agent is being endowed with knowledge, a desire to act,
and effort; and [we] have [already] explained that this [agency] is
found in the Lord. And [we] observe that the Self is the agent prompting
one’s own body to act although it does not have a body.” See also ibid.:
“Because the [Lord] acts my mere will . . .” (icchāmātreṇa ca tasya
kartr̥tvāt . . .). Cf. NBhūṣ: 453-54, which defends the idea of a cosmic
creation icchāmātrāt. On this same idea in Udayana’s works, see
Chemparathy 1972: 145 n 306, p. 146. Cf. Utpaladeva’s gloss of
Somānanda’s icchayā (ŚD 1.44ab, see above, n 156) as icchāmātreṇa (ŚDV:
32), or Abhinavagupta’s gloss of Utpaladeva’s icchāvaśāt in ĪPK I.5.7
again as icchāmātreṇa (ĪPV I: 183).

158 See ĪPV I: 183-84; ĪPVV II: 145 or ĪPV II: 152-53, translated and
analysed in Ratié 2011a: 406-07.

159 On the distinction in the Śaiva Siddhānta between the material cause
(i.e. māyā) and the efficient cause (i.e. īśvara) of the universe, see
PT 2.30cd (quoted above, n 117), TTNV: 134 (māyā hi jagata
upādānakāraṇātvāt . . . “For māyā, since it is the material cause of the
universe . . .”) and Goodall 2004: 174-77 n 128. On the idea that God
creates through his sole will, see NPP: 135 (quoted above, n 131). It
should be noted that the Vaiśeṣikas and Naiyāyikas may have originally
borrowed the notion of a creation by mere will from an ancient Śaiva
source: see Chemparathy 1965 and Bronkhorst 1996a: 289 on the
attribution by the YD of the doctrine of īśvara to pāśupatavaiśeṣika,
“Pāśupatas and Vaiśeṣikas” or “Vaiśeṣikas who are Pāśupatas”. See also
Bronkhorst 1996a: 290, on the hypothesis that Praśastapāda drew his
depiction of cosmic creation from some “Śaiva work”.

160 As noted in Goodall 1998: lxxvi, Somānanda explicitly refers to the
KT in ŚD 3.16ab (on which see Nemec 2011: 223 and n 77).

161 KT 3.10-11ab: yathā kālo hy amūrto 'pi dr̥śyate phalasādhakaḥ । evaṁ
śivo hy amūrto 'pi kurute kāryam icchayā ।। icchaiva karaṇaṁ tasya yathā
sadyogino matā । “For just as [we] observe that time, although devoid of
any corporeal form, produces a result, in the same way, Śiva, although
devoid of any corporeal form, produces an effect by virtue of [his]
will; [and] his instrument is nothing but this will, just as the [will]
of a true yogin is known [to be his sole instrument].” See Goodall 1998:
272.

162 John Nemec has emphasized that Somānanda “favourably quotes
Saiddhāntika sources in a number of places” rather than simply
dismissing them as a lower form of revelation (Nemec 2011: 58-59).

163 ŚD 1.44cd thus specifies that a yogin creates without any means
“such as clay, etc.” (see above, n 156).

164 See Torella 1994: xii-xxxvi, 2008; Nemec 2011: 31-34.

165 See ĪPVV II: 147: māyā ca bhagavacchaktivijr̥mbhāpi
viśvopādānarūpatāvabhāsitajaḍatvasvabhāvātattvarūpā. “And māyā, although
it is [in fact nothing but] the unfolding of the Lord’s power, consists
in something unreal in so far as its nature is an insentiency that is
manifested (avabhāsita) as consisting of the universe’s material cause.”

166 See Frauwallner 1962: 22; Sanderson 1985: 203; 1988: 694; Torella
1994: xiii; Ratié 2011a: 4-14.

167 Alternatively, Abhinavagupta may have been aware of the NPP passage
quoted below (Abhinavagupta already knew at least one of Rāmakaṇṭha’s
works when he composed his Tantrāloka: see Sanderson 2006: 44) and the
ĪPV passage may be an answer to Rāmakaṇṭha (who in turn was replying to
Utpaladeva).

168 See ĪPV I: 30: kartr̥jñātr̥svabhāvam iti cen nanu sa pramātaiva
tathābhūta iti ko ’nyaḥ saḥ. nanu sarvakartr̥tvasarvajñatve pramātur na
staḥ, na khalu sarvaśabdārtho jñātr̥kartr̥tvayoḥ svarūpaṁ bhinatti,
bhedadarśane ’pīśvarajñānacikīrṣāyatnāder nityasya
viṣayeṇākāraṇabhūtenānādheyātiśayatvāt. “If [the opponent replies] that
[one must prove the existence of the Lord] whose nature is that of an
agent and knower, [we answer]: ‘But since the knowing subject himself is
[of] such [a nature], who could be this other [agent and knower]?’ [If
the opponent replies:] ‘But [contrary to the Lord,] the knowing subject
does not have omnipotence and omniscience!’, [we answer in turn that]
the meaning of the prefix ‘omni-’ (sarva) [in ‘omniscient’ and
‘omnipotent’] does not involve any difference in the [very] nature of
[the powers consisting in] being a knower and an agent, because even in
a dualistic system (bhedadarśana), the Lord’s knowledge, desire to act
or effort [to act, since they are] permanent, are not made superior
(atiśaya) [than they were] by the [particular] object [on which they
focus, since this object] cannot be the cause [of any change in their
permanent nature].” Cf. Bhāskarī I: 51: na hi kaṇabhāvacayabhāvayor
agneḥ svarūpabheda ity uttaravākyābhiprāyaḥ. “The [author’s] intention
in the sentence [given in] reply is [to convey] that there is no
difference in the nature of fire, whether it exists as a [mere] spark or
as a heap [of flames].”

169 NPP: 113: atha puruṣaparīkṣānantaram īśvaraparīkṣā. nanu yuktam etad
anāntarīyakānāṁ* vaktum, iha tu jñatvakartr̥tvasvabhāve puṁsy
āvaraṇabhāvābhāvābhyāṁ savitarīvālpamahāviṣayatve
svasaṁvedanayogyatānumānābhyāṁ pūrvoktarītyā pratipādite svalpamahator
īśvarayoḥ siddhiḥ sthitaiva jñatvakartr̥tvarūpatvād īśvarasyeti kim
anyayā tatparīkṣayā । [*etad anāntarīyakānāṁ conj.: etat tannāntarīyāṇāṁ
— NPP]. “Now, immediately after the examination of the individual,
[Sadyojyotis undertakes] an examination of the Lord. [–­Objection:]
Surely this is an appropriate [thing] to say with respect to [entities]
that are not connected; but here, since the individual has as its nature
to be a knower and an agent, [and] since [this individual] is [already]
established in the manner that has already been stated, through its
perceptibility in self-awareness (svasaṁvedana) and through inference,
given that the Lord’s nature is [also] to be a knower and an agent, the
demonstration of both Lords [endowed with the powers of knowledge and
action, i.e. the individual, who is] a small [Lord since he has limited
powers] and the Great [one, whose powers are unlimited,] is ipso facto
completed, just as the sun [, although one,] can be [known as] a small
or a great object [of knowledge] according to whether a veil covering
[it] (āvaraṇa) is present or not.” As a matter of fact, the Śaiva
non-dualists describe as a veil (āvaraṇa) the delusion (moha) through
which the individual does not recognize himself as the Lord and
therefore sees himself as limited. See ĪPV I: 12, which mentions this
“veil covering the Self’s light with an appearance of stain”
(kālikākārasvaprakāśāvaraṇa), or ĪPV II: 203, which explains that
māyāśakti deludes (vimohinī) in so far as it veils (āvr̥ṇute) the Self’s
nature. See also ĪPVV II: 24 (dehātmakaniviḍatarāvaraṇābhimānaviṣamā ca
tanukaraṇaprāṇabuddhiśūnyāvaraṇāntarvartinī saṁvid amalā
śaradabhropahitaraviprakāśavat . . . “Consciousness, which [remains in
fact] devoid of stain, which is different from the [wrong]
identification with that thickest of veils that is the body, [and] which
remains internally present despite the veils that are the bodily organs,
vital breath, intellect and the void [to which individuals wrongly
identify], just as the light of the sun on which autumnal clouds have
gathered . . .” cf. Torella 2007: 928-29) or Bhāskarī I: 38, which
explains that recognition does not bring about any new knowledge but
merely removes the veil covering the Self’s true nature by stating: na
hi vātenāpasāritameghāvaraṇaḥ sūryas tadutpādita iti kathyate. “For when
the veil (āvaraṇa) of clouds [preventing us from seeing the sun] is
taken away by the wind, [we] do not say that the sun is established by
the [wind]!”

170 NPP: 113: satyam etat, jagaddhetubhūtānādīśvaraparīkṣā tv iyam
anyaivety avirodhaḥ. tathā hi na tāvad asāv asmadādīnām ātmavat
svasaṁvedanapratyakṣasiddho bhinnātmarūpatvena tasya tato ’nyatvāt, na
hy ātmanāṁ svasaṁvedanamātrāḥ saṁkīryanta ity uktam.
nāpīndriyapratyakṣeṇa parasparaṁ svabhāvād evendriyātītatvena teṣāṁ
siddheḥ, taccharīrāṇām indriyānatītatvasiddhāv api
viśiṣṭajñānakriyātmanor īśvaretarayor asiddheḥ. “This is true;
nonetheless, this examination of the beginningless Lord who is the cause
of the world is different [from the examination of the individual], so
that there is no contradiction [in writing a distinct chapter on the
Lord]. To explain: to begin with, for [limited subjects] such as us, the
[Lord] is not established through the direct perception that is
self-awareness, contrary to the Self, because he is different from this
[Self], given that he has as his nature a distinct Self. For [we have
already] explained that the pure self-awarenesses of [distinct] Selves
do not mix. Nor [is the Lord known] through a direct sensory perception,
because it is [now] established that by their very nature these
[different Selves] are beyond the reach of senses for each other, and
because, although their bodies have been established not to be beyond
the reach of senses, there is no demonstration that [both] the Lord and
[the individual] who is different from the Lord are Selves [endowed
with] particular [powers of] knowledge and action.”

171 For a particularly thorough analysis of some important passages in
the first chapter of the NPP, see Watson 2006. Ratié 2006 mentions a
number of striking similarities between Rāmakaṇṭha’s demonstration of
the Self in the first chapter of the NPP and Utpaladeva’s in the
Jñānādhikāra of the ĪPK, while emphasizing their main divergence (see in
particular n 160, p. 96).

8

Alaṁkāras in the Stotras of Utpaladeva

Radhavallabh Tripathi

The concept of alaṁkāra in Sanskrit poetics is marked with a
comprehensive approach to arts. Bharatamuni says that there are two
aspects of creativity in art — svabhāva and alaṁkāra.1 The former
indicates natural acquisitions and the latter extraordinariness attained
through practice and devotion. In a dramatic performance they culminate
into the renderings of lokadharmī and nāṭyadharmī, and in literature
into svabhāvokti and vakrokti. The effects created by the process of
alaṁkāra lead to transgressing whatever may be commonplace or trivial.
By etymology the term alaṁkāra (making perfect) stands in agreement with
this approach. Amarakośa has given four meanings of the term alam-, i.e.
bhūṣaṇa (decoration or embellishment), vāraṇa (negation or elimination),
paryāpti (sufficiency) and śakti (power).2 They are related to surface
structure, deep structure and deeper structures in an art form. They are
not isolated. The process of beautification (bhūṣaṇa) starts from the
outer structure and basically relates to the form, but it is always
linked to the content. This linkage necessitates the activity of
elimination or exclusion (vāraṇa) and both these processes of bhūṣaṇa
and vāraṇa work together to bring in paryāpti (sufficiency). Thus a
piece of art attains the state of fulfilment through bhūṣaṇa, vāraṇa and
paryāpti and in this attainment lies its śakti. The alaṁkāra involves
this fourfold view of alam, resulting in a holistic view of art. The
triple process of bhūṣaṇa, vāraṇa and paryāpti, with the fourth element
of śakti embedded as an inherent force, tends to make an artistic
creation extraordinary and this extraordinary nature of art is alaṁkāra.
The ācāryas (masters of literary theory) have termed it as alambhāva or
alaṁkāra-bhāva. Abhinavagupta says:

lokottīrṇena rūpeṇa avasthānam iti ayam eva asau alaṁkārabhāvaḥ.

Remaining in the state of extraordinariness is essence of alaṁkāra.3

In this completeness, each and every category in an art piece would
compete with the other ones in an ascending order for creating
excellence. It is this ascendance of various components of poetry that
Kuntaka terms as parasparaspardhādhiroha4 — a process in which various
components of poetry vie with each other to enhance the charm of poetry
and to make it reach the peaks of excellence.

This manifestation of alambhāva or alaṁkāra-bhāva in literature or a
piece of art encompasses all the three levels of human existence, i.e.
ādhibhautika (empirical), ādhidaivika (psychic) and ādhyātmika
(spiritual). The creative process under bhūṣaṇa, vāraṇa and paryāpti
functions on these three levels respectively. Therefore, alaṁkāra in
literature and art must unfold a holistic view of life that functions on
all these three levels, and it would reveal the extraordinary nature as
discussed above only after completing its functions on all these three
levels. It is also presumed that the gods are pleased by alaṁkāras.
Abhinavagupta, commenting on the very first kārikā of the NŚ, says that
the use of anuprāsa (alliteration) in the compound pitāmahamaheśvarau
(meaning Brahmā and Śiva) is to please both these gods.5 That means that
besides devotion, the beauty of expression is also required to be
blessed with anugraha. The concept of alaṁkāra thus tends to make an art
form an abode of divine.

The nature and choice of alaṁkāras in metaphysical poetry or in a stotra
would differ from their use in secular literature — śr̥ṅgāra-kāvya or
vīra-kāvya (romantic or heroic poetry). In metaphysical poetry or in a
stotra, use of virodha or virodhābhāsa (contradiction) alaṁkāra may be
more meaningful than mere employment of alaṁkāras like upamā (simile).
It would seem contradictory in itself that the poetry that tends to
remove all contradictions of life, itself abounds in the use of
contradiction. Contradiction becomes effective to describe the Reality
that cannot be encompassed in the ambit of ordinary language. In such
cases it culminates into a paradox. This happens in many of the
Upaniṣadic sayings. For example:

pūrṇam adaḥ pūrṇam idaṁ pūrṇāt pūrṇam udacyate ।

pūrṇasya pūrṇam ādaya pūrṇam eva avaśiṣyate ।।6

This is full, that is full. Being full, it is enjoined with the full.

Taking out full from the full, full itself remains.

or

tad ejati tan nejati tad dūre tad u antike ।

tad antar asya sarvasya tad u sarvasya bāhyataḥ ।।

That moves, that moves not. That is far off, That is very near. That is
within all this and That is outside all this — Īśa Upaniṣad 5

Virodha as a figure of speech occurs in the statements regarding
coexistence of two opposite attributes in one stratum. Mammaṭa has
adumbrated ten varieties of virodha on the basis of permutations and
combinations of contradiction between jāti (universal), guṇa (quality),
kriyā (action) and yadr̥cchā (substance).7 These ten varieties encompass
a cosmic view of virodha. Some theoreticians have upheld the view that
virodha and virodhābhāsa are two different alaṁkāras, with the
distinction that the contradiction stands unresolved in the former
whereas it is just apparent in the latter and finally resolved. In fact,
be it virodha or virodhābhāsa, the contradiction in this alaṁkāra is not
real. In terms of Vedānta, it is a prātibhāsika-sattā.

Sometimes the description of transcendental reality requires the
combination of śleṣa (pun) or rūpaka (metaphor) with virodha. Such
combinations then assume a unique character. The śleṣa or the rūpaka
must then come as subservient to virodha in such cases. This type of
combination, termed as aṅgāṅgī-bhāva by the masters of literary theory,
would invest a poem, especially a stotra, with a unique character,
making it distinct from the other forms of literature.

Instances of such use of virodha alaṁkāra abound in Utpaladeva’s
stotras. He employs this alaṁkāra to bring out the extraordinary nature
of metaphysical experience. For example:

ātmā mama bhavadbhaktisudhāpānayuvā ’pi san ।

lokayātrārajorāgat palitair iva dhūsaraḥ ।। — Śivastotrāvalī I.2
(Bhaktivilāsa)

My soul, even being young by drinking the elixir of devotion to the
Lord, appears as if dusty with grey hair, due to the rāga (colour,
attachment) of the rajas (dust, rajoguṇa) during the course of the
journey in this world.

This is an example of virodha alaṁkāra based on contradiction between
guṇas (qualities). Youth and old age are two opposite guṇas, they are
shown to be present in one entity (the ātman). This makes the poem an
example of contradiction. But this contradiction is substantiated by
śleṣa in the word rajorāga — to suit the double context of the lokayātrā
(journey in this world).

In difference to the Vedāntic view that ātman is nirguṇa (devoid of
qualities), Utpaladeva apparently juxtaposes youth and old age
simultaneously in one substratum, bringing out the sound effect of
devotion to the Lord (bhavad bhakti). The kr̥t-suffix śatr̥ joined to the
root as (to be) in the words yuvā ’pi san emphasizes the continuity of
youth through devotion, whereas the word iva (as if) added in the
statement on old age suggests that the contradiction is not a part of
the Reality. Despite the apparent contradiction of youth and old age
manifesting in ātman simultaneously, Utpaladeva has carefully phrased
this situation to bring out a resolution. The contradiction is further
resolved due to subtle use of utprekṣā in palitair iva dhūsaraḥ (appears
as if dusty with grey hair). The ātman is neither young nor old, it
appears like that during the course of the journey in this world.

Śleṣa as an alaṁkāra is of two types — śabda-śleṣa (based on word) and
artha-śleṣa (based on the meaning). Here Utpala has used the former, as
the double meaning of the word rajorāga can be conveyed only through the
use of this particular word.

The ācāryas like Mammaṭa also uphold the view that śabda-śleṣa
culminates into simile. The rajas or dust gathered due to the journey in
this world thus becomes comparable to rajoguṇa. This fusion of
śabda-śleṣa and the upamā with virodha here creates deep structures of
metaphysical and philosophical speculations. The very imagery of ātman
being continuously invested with youth, and yet appearing as an old
person, is suggestive of the fact that the journey in life does afflict
the sādhaka (devotee) with its tinge of colours, but the grace of the
Lord will continue to be showered on him.

Utpala makes skilful use of virodha with other alaṁkāras to bring out
his philosophy in many other stanzas in Bhaktivilāsa-Stotra. Virodha in
such cases stands as aṅgī or main figure of speech whereas alaṁkāras
based on similarity or pun come as the aṅgas or subservient to virodha
to substantiate the premises of the poet.

Let us take up another example:

jayanti bhaktipīyūṣarasāsavavaronmadāḥ ।

advitīyā api sadā tvaddvitīyā api prabho ।।

— Śivastotrāvalī I.5 (Bhaktivilāsa)

Victorious are they who are intoxicated by bhaktipīyūṣarasāsavavara (the
best quality essence of the wine of the nectar of devotion). They are
advitīya (single, unique) and even then they are always tvaddvitīyā
(accompanied by you).

There is a metaphor in bhaktipīyūṣarasāsavavara (the excellent essence
of the wine of the nectar of devotion). The effects of the intoxication
of wine can terminate the discretion and the discriminatory powers of a
person. Here the bhaktipīyūṣarasāsavavara leads to the termination of
duality. The complexity of dualism and non-dualism going together is
emphasized by the use of virodha alaṁkāra. Here too, śabda-śleṣa and
rūpaka support virodha to project the uniqueness of experiences arising
out of devotion to the Lord. In the same way, the experience of seeing
the Lord when there is complete annihilation of all objects of knowledge
has been brought out in the following stanza:

nātha vedyakṣaye kena na dr̥śyo asy ekakaḥ sthitaḥ ।

vedyavedaikasaṅkṣobhe ’py asi bhaktaiḥ sudarśanaḥ ।। — Śivastotrāvalī
I.8 (Bhaktivilāsa)

Lord, who will not see you as the One standing alone, after the complete
annihilation of all objects of knowledge? After all the subject and
object are merged together, you are to be sighted easily.

If the seer and the seen are merged together, how can the Lord be seen
easily? This contradiction in the statement cannot be resolved unless
the stanza is considered to be having a tinge of bhāvika alaṁkāra. The
quality of a literary discourse leading the connoisseur to a clear
perception is bhāvika alaṁkāra. The happenings of past and things to
happen in future are portrayed so vividly that the reader is able to see
them. Defining bhāvika alaṁkāra in his Kāvyālaṁkāra, Bhāmaha says:

Bhāvika is that quality of a literary discourse where things of past and
future are perceived as if by eyes. It is caused by variety, sublimity
and dramatic quality of a narrative as well as by the clarity of words.8

Daṇḍin understands bhāva as the intention of the poet. The theme is
grand, and speech and expressions match it, so that everything becomes
subservient to the intention of the poet.9 Later authors have viewed
bhāvika as unfolding of the vision of past and future leading to
realization. Ruyyaka says that the past and the future become alive
before our eyes through bhāvika — they become perceptible and we stand
witness to them.10 Appaya Dīkṣita defines it as
bhūtabhavyārthasākṣāddarśanavarṇanam (direct vision and narration of the
past and the future). Āśādhara Bhaṭṭa in his commentary on Kuvalayānanda
defines bhāva in bhāvika as sākṣātkāra (vision) — bhāvāya sākṣātkārāya
prabhavati iti bhāvikaṁ. Ruyyaka also says that there are two types of
correspondences in poetry — subjective and objective — hr̥daya-saṁvāda
(empathy) and vastu-saṁvāda (objective visualization). In
rasavadalaṁkāra we have hr̥daya-saṁvāda and in svabhāvokti there is
vastu-saṁvāda. But in bhāvika it is neither vastu-saṁvāda nor
hr̥daya-saṁvāda; it is clear perception. The masters of literary theory
have used the term sākṣātkāra for the experience of poetry having
bhāvika alaṁkāra. The same term is used in Śaivism and Vedānta to define
the mystic experience. The mystic poems as those of Utpala lead to a
perception beyond time and space, and thus they illustrate bhāvika
alaṁkāra.

Asaṅgati (incongruity or disconnection) is another important alaṁkāra of
the group of alaṁkāras based on contradiction. It is used for situations
involving non-applicability of the rules of cause and effect, etc.
Asaṅgati is often used to bring a sense of saṅgati (connection).
Śobhākaramiśra has enumerated eight types of asaṅgatis enveloping a vast
spectrum of time and space. They are: (i) the effect manifests
elsewhere, (ii) the effect that should have been at two different places
manifests at one place; (iii-iv) the effect manifests earlier, or
manifests with the cause, (v-vi) the effect manifests much later or too
early; and (vii-viii) the effect belonging to this world is found in
another world and vice versa.11

Utpaladeva explores the disconnections or connections between the causes
and the effects through asaṅgati alaṁkāra with a view to establish the
uniqueness of metaphysical experiences. The following stanza from his
Stotra is a good example of asaṅgati alaṁkāra —

citram nisargato nātha duḥkhabījaṁ idaṁ manaḥ ।

tvadbhaktirasasaṁsiktaṁ niḥśreyasamahāphalam ।। — Śivastotrāvalī I.26
(Bhaktitavilāsa)

Strange as it is, O Lord, that my mind — a seed of sorrow by nature —
has yielded the great fruit of salvation.

The asaṅgati alaṁkāra here joins hand again with a complex metaphor,
wherein the mind is the earth, sorrow is the seed sown in it, bhakti
(devotion) is the rasa (water, bliss) and niḥśreyasa (salvation) is the
mahāphala (great fruit).

In fact, we do not find singular usages of alaṁkāras in this type of
poetry, as one alaṁkāra would be joined invariably by other members of
its group or the other group. This becomes necessary due to the
complexity and unique character of the experiences that are to be
delineated in devotional and mystic poetry. Rūpaka assumes a distinct
character, supported by an alaṁkāra like vyatireka. The following stanza
combines a number of alaṁkāras to bring out the unparalleled nature of
Lord Śiva:

viśvendhanamahākṣārānulepaśucivarcase ।

mahānalāya bhavate viśvaikahaviṣe namaḥ ।। — Śivastotrāvalī II.2
(Sarvātmaparibhāvana)

Salutations to you, O Big Fire, consuming the offering of the whole
Universe, and with your body having become pious by smearing the ashes
of the firewood of this world.

Rūpaka is the main alaṁkāra here, supported by virodha alaṁkāra. The
metaphor of the world as a fuel incorporates the contradiction or
virodha alaṁkāra, i.e. that the Lord is pious even when he smears his
body with the ashes of this fuel. The metaphor of mahānala (great fire)
is also suggestive of vyatireka alaṁkāra, as it implies that Lord Śiva
exceeds an ordinary fire. Again the metaphor and vyatireka in the second
line are supported by another metaphor of viśvaikahaviḥ — that the world
is a haviḥ (oblation) for the great fire that is Śiva. The whole stanza
is also an example of parikara alaṁkāra. Parikara alaṁkāra manifests by
the appropriate use of adjectives. There are three adjectives used here
for Lord Śiva — viśvendhanamahākṣārānulepaśucivarcas, mahānala and
viśvaikahaviḥ. All of them suitably bring out the distinct nature of the
Lord. Also as the adjectives so suitably used to describe Lord Śiva are
all suggestive of his extraordinariness and grandeur, the stanza is also
characterized by udātta alaṁkāra. In fact, Utpala’s poetry subtly
breathes in the mixture of such alaṁkāras like parikara, udātta with
rūpaka. It is the vision of the divine that leads to the expressions
structured with alaṁkāras like virodha, parikara, udātta, rūpaka and
vyatireka — with implications of atiśayokti.

Such specific combinations of alaṁkāras distinguish the poetry of
mystics like Utpala from other types of literary compositions. The
alaṁkāras employed in such poetry present a feast of contradictions that
invariably and unmistakably culminates in the state of bliss. The
contradictions then become the vehicles for a journey to travel beyond
the mundane. A glimpse of the transcendental can be had through the
scope created by contradictory statements, such as

sahasrasūryakiraṇādhikaśuddhaprakāśavān ।

api tvaṁ sarvabhuvanavyāpako ’pi na dr̥śyase ।। — Śivastotrāvalī III.19
(Praṇayaprasāda)

Having pure brilliance more than the rays of thousands of suns, you are
not visible even when you pervade all the cosmos.

This leads us to distinguish the specific nature of alaṁkāras and the
types of alaṁkāras that are used in the stotras of the
philosopher-poets, like Utpaladeva.

The following stanza 14 from Sarvātmaparibhāvana presents a combination
of rūpaka and udātta:

taṭeṣv eva paribhrāntaiḥ labdhās tās tā vibhūtayaḥ ।

yasya tasmai namas tubhyam agādhaharasindhave ।।

Salutations to thee, O unfathomed sea Lord Śiva, just by loitering upon
whose banks people get unaccountable prosperities.

Here also udātta is aṅga (subservient) to rūpaka. In all such instances,
atiśayokti forms the base. Ultimately, the saṅkara (commixture) of such
figures of speech enables the poet to create divine aesthetics. The
saṁsr̥ṣṭi (fusion) of alaṁkāras like rūpaka, parikara, vyatireka and
udātta leads to a samplava — a confluence of diverse streams forming
unfathomed sea — which Utpala terms as rāgarasa.

tvaccidānandajaladhes cyutāḥ saṁvittivipruṣaḥ ।

imāḥ kathaṁ me bhagavan na amr̥tāsvādasundarāḥ ।।

tvayi rāgarase nātha na magnaṁ hr̥dayaṁ prabho ।

yeṣāṁ ahr̥dayā eva te avajñāspadaṁ īdr̥śāḥ ।। — Śivastotrāvalī III.6-7
(Praṇayaprasāda)

The drops of consciousness trickling from the Sea of Bliss that is You —
will they not be beautiful to me like nectar? O Lord, heartless are they
whose hearts have not been submerged in the rāgarasa that You are. They
are not subjected to the grace from you.

References

Alaṁkāra-Ratnākara of Śobhākaramiśra, ed. C.R. Devadhar, Poona: Oriental
Book Agency, 1942.

Alaṁkāra-Sarvasva of Ruyyaka with Sañjīvinī of Śrīvidyācakravartin, ed.
R.C. Dwivedi, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1965.

Amarakośa – Edited by Hargovind Shastri, Kashi Sanskrit Granthamālā,
198, Chowkhambha Sanskrit Series Office, Varanasi, Vikram Saṁvat 2016.

Dhvanyāloka of Ānandavardhana, ed. K. Krishnamoorthy, Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass, 1982.

Dhvanyālokalocana (Locana): Dhvanyālokalocana- Kerala Commentaries,
vols. I-II, ed. C.M. Neelkanthan, Tripunithura: Centre for Heritage
Studies, 2011.

Īśādidaśopaniṣadaḥ, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1st edn., 1964, repr.
1975.

Kāvyādarśa of Daṇḍin with commentary of Ramachandra Mishra, Varanasi:
Chowkhambha Vidya Bhavan, 1958.

Kāvyālaṁkāra of Bhāmaha, ed. Raman Kumar Sharma, Delhi: Vidya Nidhi
Prakashan, 1994.

Kāvyaprakāśa of Mammaṭa with English translation by Sir Ganganatha Jha,
Delhi: Bharatiya Vidya Prakashan, 1985.

Nāṭyaśāstra (NŚ) – of Bharatamuni, ed. Ravishankar Nagar, vols. I-IV,
Delhi: Parimal Publications, 1983-84.

Śivastrotrāvalī of Utpaladeva, ed. Sushama Jadu, New Delhi: Rashtriya
Sanskrit Sansthan, 2010.

Siddhitrayī of Utpaladeva, ed. Surya Prakash Vyas, Varanasi: Chowkhambha
Sanskrit Sansthan, 1988.

Vakroktijīvitam of Kuntaka, ed. K. Krishmoorthy, Dharwad: Karnatak
University, 1977.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 NŚ, XXXIII.6.

2 alam bhūṣaṇaparyāptiśaktivāraṇavācakam — Amarakośa III.3.252; mā sma
mā alaṁ ca vāraṇe — ibid. 3.4.11.

3 Locana on Dhvanyāloka (Varanasi edn.), p. 499.

4 vakratāvividhaguṇālaṁkārasampadāṁ paraspara-spardhādhirohaḥ —
Vakroktijīvitam, p. 10.

5 pitāmahamaheśvarau iti kramaḥ chekānuprāsārthaḥ । sālaṁkārasya ca
vākyābhinayatāṁ darśayityuṁ । sālaṅkārasya devatāparitoṣahetutvaṁ ca
darśayituṁ । — Abhinavabhāratī on Nāṭyaśāstra I.1.

6 This verse occurs in the beginning of the fifth chapter of
Br̥hadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad. Śaṅkarācārya has commented upon it.
Īśādidaśopaniṣadaḥ, p. 950.

7 KP, X.110-11a: 407-08.

8 tad bhāvikam iti prāhuḥ prabandhaviṣayaṁ guṇaṁ ।

pratyakṣa iva dr̥śyante yatrārthāḥ bhūtabhāvinaḥ ।।

citrodāttādbhutārthatvaṁ kathāyāḥ svabhinīyatā ।

śabdānākulatā ca iti tasya hetuṁ pracakṣate ।। — Kāvyālaṁkāra III.53-54

9 bhāvaḥ kaver abhiprāyaḥ kāvyeṣv āsiddhisaṁsthitaḥ ।

parasparopakāritvaṁ sarveṣāṁ vastuparvaṇām ।।

viśeṣaṇānāṁ vyarthānām akriyā sthānavarṇanā ।

vyaktir uktikramabalād gabhīrasyāpi vastunaḥ ।।

bhāvāyattam idaṁ sarvam iti tad bhāvikaṁ viduḥ ।। — Kāvyādarśa II.364-65

10 Alaṁkāra-Sarvasva, sūtra 80, p. 328.

11 Alaṁkāra-Ratnākara, sūtra 55, p. 96.

9

The Twelve Kālīs and Utpaladeva’s

Appraisal of the Sensory Experience

Aleksandra Wenta

The Twelve Kālīs and Pratyabhijñā

The Doctrine of the Twelve Kālīs constitutes one of the earliest
developments of the Kālīkula/Kālīkrama. Moreover, it represents the most
esoteric teaching in the entire Kashmiri Śaiva tradition predominant in
the Kashmir region in the early medieval period. The tenth-eleventhth
century Kashmiri Abhinavagupta understands the Twelve Kālīs to be the
most elevated esoteric aspect of his Trika system. For him, She Who
Draws Time to Herself (Kālasaṁkarṣaṇī), the goddess of the Kālīkrama, is
Beyond Parā (Parātīta) of the Trika goddesses consisting of the Supreme
Goddess (Parā), the Middle Goddess (Parāparā) and the Lower Goddess
(Aparā), that underline the doctrinal foundation of his Trika system.1

According to Abhinavagupta, it was Utpaladeva himself who appears in the
spiritual lineage that transmitted the Doctrine of the Twelve Kālīs to
him. The ninth-century Somānanda,2 the author of Śivadr̥ṣṭi and thus, the
first preceptor of the Pratyabhijñā system was, according to
Abhinavagupta, a disciple of the Krama teacher Govindarāja who, before
dying, passed to him the Doctrine of the Twelve Kālīs taught in the
Devīpañcaśatikā (Kālīkulapañcaśatakā). This doctrine was transmitted by
Somānanda, through his spiritual lineage of Utpaladeva and
Lakṣmaṇagupta, down to Abhinavagupta.3 Utpaladeva did not directly refer
to his spiritual heritage coming from the Krama’s descendants (probably
due to intentional promotion of non-tantric evaluation of the tradition
founded on the rational basis). Still, his emphasis on the sensory
experience saturated with the lunar nectar, systematically developed in
the Śivastotrāvalī (ŚSĀ), the magnum opus of the Kashmiri Śaiva
devotional literature, has strong affinity with the Kālīkrama’s
assessment of the sense-organs. The word “strong” is used here to
acknowledge the fact that the Krama system constitutes the important
foundation of the Pratyabhijñā, as well as the Trika and Spanda
schools.4 Perhaps not only these reasons were present in the minds of
Utpaladeva’s interpreters — Kṣemarāja and Maheśvarānanda — who
elaborated on the essential teachings of Utpaladeva in the light of the
Krama-Mahārtha. Especially worth mentioning is Kṣemarāja who, in his
commentary on Utpaladeva’s ŚSĀ,5 is firmly committed to establishing the
veracity of the Krama system.

On the other hand, the thirteenth-century Maheśvarānanda in his
commentary (Parimala) on his own Mahārthamañjarī (MM) — the south Indian
version of the Kālīkrama, set up in the pervasive Pratyabhijñā
framework, uses quotations from the ŚSĀ in the context of the scriptural
justification of the secret Kaula ritual (kulayāga) which he regards as
the practice of the empowered means (śāktopāya).6 This interesting
configuration displays a certain result, namely, the indistinct
correlation between the Krama and the Kaula7 “logically” provable by the
axiomatic system of the Pratyabhijñā;8 for example, the Twelve Kālīs as
the representation of the reflective awareness (vimarśa).

The Doctrine of the Twelve Kālīs is centred on the mystical experience
embodied in the Twelve Suns known as the Sequence of the Sun-Goddess
(bhānavī-krama)9 which is said to be the essential teaching of the
northern transmission (uttarāmnāya). The Twelve Kālīs represent: (1) the
dynamism of the cognitive act (saṁvit-cakra, saṁvit-krama); (2) the
universal pulse of consciousness (sāmānya-spanda); and (3) the twelve
divinized sense-organs (prakāśa-cakra, marīcidevatā-cakra, raśmi-cakra).
Within this conceptual scheme, the Twelve Kālīs stand for the method
(krama) and the tool (the senses) of the cognitive process that give
rise to the reflective awareness (vimarśa) that is the capacity of pure
luminous consciousness (prakāśa, bhāsa) to reflect upon its infinite
nature. The category of vimarśa constitutes one of the major
preoccupations of Utpaladeva established in his commentary (Vr̥tti) on
the Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Kārikā (ĪPK) where he defines vimarśa as the
power of the activity of consciousness (citikriyāśakti).10 In this
sense, the Twelve Kālīs constitute the analytical model of the cognitive
process where emphasis is placed on the cognitive energies themselves —
the sense-organs and thoughts accompanying sensory perception, pointing
the way to mystical communion with the phenomenal reality. Activated on
the basis of the purification of thought-constructs (vikalpa-saṁskāra),
the Twelve Kālīs give rise to the awakening of pure knowledge (śuddha
vidyā). This entrance to the condition free of thought-constructs
(nirvikalpa) is granted when the intellect “attains to the state of
intrinsic purity as a reflecting medium”,11 in this case, all that
remains is the universal agent of mental representations. Therefore, “he
who, having all as his essence, thus knows: ‘All this multiform
deployment is mine’, he, even in the flow of mental constructs, attains
the state of Maheśa”.12 In this way, also the individual subject who,
though continuing to produce mental constructs deriving precisely from
the power of the Lord — “mine is this multiform deployment of the
saṁsāra” — this subject, too, permeates the universe without any
differentiation and transforms all the mental constructs into pure
reflective awareness, attains the state of Maheśvara.13 Apart from this
epistemic bedrock systematized by the terminology of the Pratyabhijñā,
the Kālīkrama, along with the Twelve Kālīs core, constitutes the highest
theoretical development of the sensory experience and the hermeneutics
of this process, that cannot be found in any other Kashmiri Śaiva
tradition of that time. Notably, in this place where the functioning of
the senses is rendered experientially positive, the Kālīkrama and
Utpaladeva fuse. In Utpaladeva’s concept of devotion, the sensory
experience plays a prominent part. Indulgence in the senses entails
entering into the highest realization of Śiva’s nature, it is a sudden
recognition (sāhasa-abhijñāna),14 “saturated with the pure,
everlastingly flowing stream of the nectar of consciousness
(saṁvit-amr̥ta)”15 that comprises the cognition “that all is one”.16
However, apart from the frenzy dynamism performed by the religious zeal
of the senses, devotion has also another dimension. Initially it appears
static, suiting to the overall picture of what is called the secret
doctrine of the Kālīkrama, in so far as for Utpaladeva devotion is the
condition of equipoise and permanence (sthiti). Utpaladeva avers:

Nothing whatsoever is to be utilized

For becoming firmly established (sthiti-kr̥ta) in one’s own self,
luminosity is clearly apparent and eternal.

May this idea take a stronghold on me.17

Only those who are abiding in their own true selves (svasthā), are
devoted to you.18

Having settled (sthitvā) in the abode of your pure consciousness

Oh, may I ever worship you, O Lord,

By means of body, speech and mind [. . .].19

The condition of permanence (sthiti), apart from being only one phase of
the cognitive process (sr̥ṣṭi, sthiti, saṁhāra, etc.), also constitutes
the highest state of the Goddess Kālasaṁkarṣaṇī, marking the complete
stability in pure consciousness represented by the “purified cognition”
of the wheel of consciousness (saṁvit-cakra= Twelve Kālīs)20 and tasted
as the lunar nectar of immortality. The condition of permanence (sthiti)
unites the solar–lunar dimensions enclosed within the vidyā of
Kālasaṁkarṣaṇī. Therefore, what initially seems a static establishment
(sthiti) in pure consciousness involves astonishing richness of the
sensory experience embodied in the Sun of the Twelve Kālīs. The
functioning of the senses operates simultaneously in the expansive and
contractive manner. When expanded, they savour the blissful nectar of
the expanded consciousness represented by the Sixteen Digits of the Full
Moon, in the contracted state, they relish the innermost lunar nectar of
the śāmbhava state — the Seventeenth Digit of the New Moon.

Saṁvit-Mārga, Saṁvit-Cakra

One of the major preoccupations of Utpaladeva’s theory of recognition
(pratyabhijñā) is the attempt to establish a single dynamic subject,21
the “I” of Śiva that manifests within a duality of prakāśa-vimarśa, the
pure luminous consciousness (prakāśa/Śiva) and the reflective awareness
(vimarśa/Śakti). The polarization of prakāśa-vimarśa is carried out to
strengthen the experimental warrant of the ultimate non-dualism
(paramādvaita) tied up by the knot of their intrinsic unity (abheda).
This demonstrating procedure determines the unshaken ground for the
conceptions of “transcendence” and “immanence” when viewed from the
perspective of the phenomenology of perception leading to recognition of
the absolute (“I” of Śiva) in the entire objective phenomena. Indeed,
ŚSĀ portrays Śiva endowed with sunrays (bhānumarīcyaḥ)22 (due to which
the singleness of the dynamic subject is preserved). Śiva is the aim,
the light of pure consciousness (prakāśa) attainable through sunrays of
the reflective awareness (vimarśa). Sunbeams represent the cognizance of
the senses whose functioning employs the reflective awareness. For the
devotee, the path of the senses (saṁvit-mārga) is the path to attain
Śiva.23 On the more interiorized level of mystical absorption, the
senses are transformed into the sense-divinities whose sensory
perception is utilized as the sacrificial substances offered to Śiva.24

Hail to your terrible wheel of the goddesses of the senses
(śakti-vr̥nda)!

Who, by making an offering of the sense-objects,

Worship you through the enjoyment of delight.25

In the commentary on this verse of the ŚSĀ, Kṣemarāja defines
śakti-vr̥nda as the wheel of consciousness (saṁvit-cakra).26 Saṁvit-cakra
is extensively elaborated in chap. IV of Abhinavagupta’s TĀ, in the
section dedicated to the empowered means (śāktopāya)27 denoting the
Twelve Kālīs embedded in the dynamism of the cognitive process.
Kṣemarāja’s interpretation of śakti-vr̥nda is unique. This term never
appears in the Kālīkrama scriptures in the context of the Twelve Kālīs,
in so far as it is exclusively reserved to denote the collective reality
of the Kālīkrama’s metaphysics known as the Wheel of the Aggregate
(vr̥nda-cakra). However, an exception is found in the Cidgaganacandrikā
(CGC) of Śrīvatsa. In this text dating most probably from the thirteenth
century, śakti-vr̥nda refers to the countenance of the Goddess as the Sun
of Consciousness in the precise meaning of saṁvit-cakra. According to
scriptural testimony, this is the plane of the twelvefold sequence
manifested in the world in the form of words and everywhere else as the
squaring of the triads.28 The twelvefold scheme (3 x 4 = 12) represents
the processing of the cognitive energy taking place between the trinity
of the knower (pramātr̥), the means of knowledge (pramāṇa), and the
object of knowledge (prameya). Each follows the fourfold sequence of (1)
projection (sr̥ṣṭi), (2) maintenance (sthiti), (3) withdrawal (saṁhāra),
and (4) the inexplicable (anākhya). The attentive reflection on this
sequence (krama-parāmarśa) that is established as the ground of all
experience is the practical application of saṁvit-cakra. The projection
of the object in the outline of objectivity, generated by the unfolding
of will, is emergence (akalitollāsa/sr̥ṣṭi). Each time this will falls on
the external object, the sensual enjoyment (tatsambhoga/sthiti) is
maintained. Returning back to its own essential nature which is the
withdrawal of expansion for contraction is relish (carvaṇa/saṁhāra). The
final repose of the differentiated objects in the unity of
consciousness, where they are mirrored as reflections indistinct from
their primordial source (the absolute “I” (pūrṇa ahaṁ), is the phase of
the inexplicable cessation (virāma/anākhya).29 Although the inexplicable
cessation represents the state of consciousness that is free of the
duality of thought-constructs (nirvikalpa), it still cognizes, in so far
as it recognizes the movement of thoughts as the pure luminous
consciousness and, moreover, comprises a cognition: “all this is my
glory”. In this way, the inexplicable cessation retains the activities
of the senses and cognition but endows them with a new status close to
their divine nature.

Sunbeams of Devotion

Utpaladeva uses the sense-organs as a framework for his eulogy of
devotional experience in a way that their most exalted commitment is the
fullness of their realization. Devotion commands the experience through
the senses, generating the magnetic field of blissful elation which
grows in intensity as religious passion increases. Perhaps more
striking, authenticity of devotion is provable by the sensory rapture
that permeates the subjective and objective contents of the cognitive
process. As Utpaladeva tells us: “those only are your true devotees who
experience the subject and object through an expanded fund of
sensation”.30 The entire spectrum of sensorial intensity embedded in the
devotional “methodology”, “the sunbeams of devotion”,31 as Utpaladeva
calls it, brings forth a constitutive evaluation of the sensory
experience permitting a mystical absorption (samāveśa). Both Utpaladeva
and Kṣemarāja equate devotion (bhakti) with possession32 (āveśa) and
mystical absorption (samāveśa)33 in a way in which devotional commitment
of the senses is highlighted in the perspective of the sensory
involvement that leads naturally to immersion in exalted moods (rasa)
resulting in mystical communion with the absolute. At this stage, the
sense-organs unfold in accord with their innate spontaneity extracting
from the objective sphere the essence, the subtle portion, as fragrance,
colour, sound, etc. which serves as a means leading to intimate union
with pure consciousness, represented by the relishing of taste (rasa).
This savoury awareness of the senses is indicated by usage of such terms
as: the bliss of tasting (rasana), relish (carvaṇa), enjoying a flavour
(āsvāda). They convey the idea of universal interpenetration to the
point of final absorption. Relishing the savour is the image of
assimilation and the means for increase of power. Working at the
intersection of semiotic and symbolic, the act of tasting is
ontologically the activity of dissolution (carvaṇa = saṁhāra) that
exemplifies interiorization of the objective content (the krama rests in
the akrama). Destruction by licking carried out by the network of the
rays of the senses (represented by the Twelve Kālīs) intent on universal
dissolution, appears commonly in the scriptures of the Kālīkrama
tradition, standing for the epitome of reflective awareness (parāmarśa).
As Torella pointed out,34 the act of savouring, represented by such
terms as carvaṇa, āsvāda, rasana, is complementary to vimarśa and its
derivates.

Apart from palatable absorption, there is yet another notion implied by
the image of devotionally-imbued senses that also posits an
all-encompassing relatedness in virtue of which the senses lead to
recognition of the unity-in-difference (bhedābheda/kramākrama). The
notion is that of pervasion (vyāpti). Because of their pervasive nature,
the sense-organs transform into magnetic tools operating within the
field of devotional enchantment. The pervasion of the senses, the
concept of the intertwining of all things where the lower is pervaded by
the higher that contains it, lies at the foundation of the Kālīkrama
tradition.35 Sunrays symbolically represent the pervasion of the senses.
As much as solar energy, the sunbeams of the senses illumine the world
both partially (as every individual thing) and collectively. The solar
radiance spreads outwards, precisely this distribution in all directions
refers to the activity of pervasion.36 This symbolizes the fact that
everything is made manifest by the light of consciousness and, as such,
attains its true being by realizing its unity with all. As the
instrument of pervasion (vyāpti), the senses have a capacity of merging
things in their intrinsic unity. On that level, the senses have already
lost their differentiated character and became indistinct from the
supreme “I”. The supreme “I” is a subject having recognized the movement
of the senses as the activity of pure consciousness. Therefore, the
activity of merging evokes the dynamic character of pervasion that, on
the ground of the Kālīkrama, is enacted by the senses which are actually
the partisans of the energized union (mahāmelāpa).37 This synthesis
articulates the locus of the identity within the dynamism of the senses,
which, acting in an all-permeating manner (vyāpaka), are compelled to
savour the unifying taste of non-dual consciousness (sāmarasya) in each
and every moment of perception.38 Utpaladeva is clear in his intention
that seeks to affirm the constitutive character of the senses engaged in
union at the culminating point of his eulogy of devotion. Immersion in
the functioning of the senses penetrating the objective and the
subjective content with the intention of their endless conjunctions is
implied in Utpaladeva’s concept of the great festival of worship
(mahotsava). As Utpaladeva tells us:

I pay homage to Śiva, who

During the festival of dissolution

Is passionately and tightly embraced by Śivā (Pārvatī, Śakti)

Through whom the entire universe is enjoyed

By means of drinking, eating and decoration.39

Oh, hail to the great festival of worship

Inexplicable and sweet

From which even tears that fall

Bring forth the savour of the immortal nectar.40

In the context of tantric practice, mahotsava stands for the code of
sensorial excess, referring to the performance of the great banquet
where the siddhas and yoginīs come to unite (melāpa) with the sole aim
of generating nectar (amr̥ta). Indeed, Maheśvarānanda favours this
interpretation by establishing Utpaladeva’s mahotsava at the centre of
his Kaula-Krama definition of the empowered means (śāktopāya).41
However, withholding the urge for setting apart the implications of the
purely ritualistic kind, we put forward the “cognitive” interpretation,
pronouncing the siddhas and yoginīs to be representations of the deities
of sense-organs and the objects of senses fused in the pulsating union
that activates the unfolding of the nectar of bliss. The nectar of bliss
represents the expanded form of consciousness characterized by the
outpouring of the energies of the senses saturating and permeating the
world of phenomenal existences from within and without. The stream of
overflowing energy experienced through the penetrating rush of the
senses brings forth the pervasion that is essentially the undivided
state of oneness enabling everything to emerge, to be maintained, and to
dissolve within the infinite chain of interrelated conjunctions. The
pervasion is implicit in the nature of the senses which enjoy themselves
in expansion and contraction of their intrinsic energies encapsulating
all things in their essential unity.

Pūrṇa: The Lunar Nectar of Bliss

Intense longing for the spiritual experience of the perfect fullness
(pūrṇa) manifested in the lunar nectar, the immortal wine, permeates all
levels of the ŚSĀ. The most richly evoked by Utpaladeva is the meaning
of pūrṇa referring to the supreme condition of śāmbhava.42 This notion
is exemplified in the oozing of the full nectar of immortality
(amr̥ta-pūrṇatva)43 that fills and satisfies the world of phenomenal
existence with bliss. The perfect fullness (pūrṇa, paripūrṇa) is the
realization of the ontological identity between the world of the
phenomenal existences being indistinct from Śiva’s pure consciousness,
as expressed in the statement: “the whole world is your perfect
fullness”.44 Moreover, the attainment of the perfect fullness (pūrṇa) by
the senses is a necessary condition for their deification that endows
the faculties of the senses with the “brilliantly emissive splendour”.45
Pūrṇa often associated with the lunar symbolism illustrates the
self-regenerated source that simultaneously empties and fills itself
with the moonlight nectar. The apotheosis of the outward saturation is
symbolized by the full moon; on the contrary, the pinnacle of the inward
refilling is marked by the new moon. Both dimensions seem valid in
Utpaladeva’s exposition of the lunar nectar that carries the experience
of bliss.

1. Pūrṇa — the full moon of the sensory experience

Even while resting on their objects

The faculties of the senses provide

The devotees with the immortal wine [. . .]46

In the Kālīkrama’s hermeneutics of the senses, the experience of
objectivity obtained by the solar functioning of the sense-organs is
embodied in bliss whose form is lunar nectar. When the sunrays of the
sense-organs are filled with pure desire (icchā) towards their outward
outpour, they bring the emanation of sensory experience to its fullness.
The nectar of bliss arises from the will of making the sensory
experience complete. In this state the “condensed consciousness” is
experienced as a fivefold object of sense. Ten rays of the sense-organs
along with the mind (manas) and the intellect (buddhi), treated as one,
make eleven. In this way, the bliss of the sensory experience arises
sixteenfold. Sixteen is the symbolic number of the full moon of
objectivity, and its form is nectar; it is the bliss because it is based
on the great bliss of the object of desire that finds its fullness.47

2. Pūrṇa ahaṁ — the new moon of the perfect fullness of I-ness

Reverence to him

Whose unique activity is the destruction

Of the great darkness of delusion

Whose luminosity transcends all other lights

Whose symbol is the moon.48

The Lord who is free of thought-constructs (nirvikalpa) [. . .] The
perfect fullness of the highest bliss (mahānandapūrṇa).49

The perfect fullness of I-ness (pūrṇa ahaṁ) constitutes the aim of the
Pratyabhijñā system in so far as it represents the supreme condition of
śāmbhava. It is a state free of thought-constructs (nirvikalpa) where
the trinity of the cognitive process (the subject, object and means of
knowledge) are identified with pure consciousness (cinmātra). This
identification is supported by taking delight in their single flavour
(ekarasa). Pūrṇa ahaṁ is the state of repose (viśrānti) wherein the
activities of mind and senses, free from their differentiated character,
are empowered to operation by the power of bliss (ānanda-śakti). The
relation between the perfect fullness of I-ness (pūrṇa ahaṁ) and the
dynamism of the cognitive process enclosed within the functioning of the
senses is described in terms of catoptric symbolism. Pūrṇa ahaṁ
represents the mirror-like (bimba) substratum for the absolute freedom
(svātantrya) supporting the unity of the play of the cosmic reflections
(pratibimba) deployed in the cognitive process. With emphasis on the
reabsorbing character of Śiva who presides over the cosmic dissolution,
the perfect fullness of I-ness (pūrṇa) is symbolically depicted by the
seventeenth lunar digit of the new moon, and not by the full moon. The
seventeenth lunar digit represents the perfect fullness of the inward
realization that contains the lunar nectar of immortality which pours
down into the manifestation of the objective reality.

3. Pūrṇa — the composite of the transmental (unmanā) and “with mind”
(samanā).

Wherever I go with body, speech, and mind

All that is you only

May this ultimate truth indeed

Become fully realized (paripūrṇa) in me.50

Looking closely at Utpaladeva’s sensorial code of mystical experience,
we can notice that the perfect realization (paripūrṇa) experienced as
the savour of the immortal nectar (amr̥ta) is a fusion of two states. The
one, the expansion of the senses pulsating with bliss, is balanced by
the second state enclosed within the image of serenity of the śāmbhava.
In the Kālīkrama, they correspond respectively to the states known as
“with mind” (samanā) and the transmental (unmanā). The state “with mind”
stands for the sensual enjoyment of sense-perceptions experienced as
wonder (camatkr̥ti), which gives rise to the outlet of the senses by
which an adept apprehends the beauty of the sensory world in the form of
sound, touch, etc.; this is the sequence (krama) of the current of the
senses, flowing both inside and outside, experienced as the bliss of
tasting (rasana).51 When this activity ceases to exist, and dissolves
away, it enters into the state of transmental, the non-sequence
(akrama). The state of unmanā is the form of the eternally cognized
illumination where various cycles of perception shine in identity with
Śiva’s pure consciousness.52 In the interiority of the transmental, the
consumed objectivity is relished as nectar (amr̥ta). By means of this
nectar, the inner outpouring of the senses takes place and one
experiences the world of phenomenal existence as if submerged in divine
libation. The fusion of these two states unfolding in the mode of the
non-sequential sequence (kramākrama) is rooted in the supreme condition
of permanence (sthiti) that lies at the foundation of the Kālīkrama’s
hermeneutics of the sensory experience.

References

Manuscript Sources

CMSS = Ciñcinīmatasārasamuccaya. The manuscripts of the
Ciñcinīmatasārasamuccaya. All are paper MSS deposited in the National
Archives, Kathmandu (NA) photographed by the Nepal German Manuscript
Preservation Project (NGMPP).

Kālīkulapañcaśatakā (Devīpañcaśatikā) MS no. 5-358 (Bauddhatantra),
NGMPP: reel no. B 30/26; no. of folios: 88; size: 20.5 x 5 cm; Material:
palm-leaf; script: Newārī. Complete.

MS Kh: NA MS no.: 1-245 (Tantra) 411; NGMPP reel no. A 1177/7; no. of
folios: 36; size: 22.6 x 5.6 cm; script (remarks): DN; folios 1-21,
24-26, 30-41.

MS Gh: NA MS no.: 1-199 (Śaivatantra) 410; NGMPP reel no. B123/5; no. of
folios: 69; size : 22 1/2 x 7 cm; script: Devanāgarī.

Printed Editions

CGC = Cidgaganacandrikā by Kālidāsa, ed. Swami Trivikrama Tirtha, Arthur
Avalon Tantrik Text Series (John Woodroffe), Calcutta, 1937.

DhvĀ = Dhvanyāloka of Ānandavardhana with the Locana of Abhinavagupta,
ed. Daniel H.H. Ingalls, Jeffrey Mousaieff Masson and M.T. Patwardhan
(Harvard Oriental Series, 49), Cambridge, MA/London: Harvard University
Press, 1990.

ĪPK = Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Kārikā of Utpaladeva, and Vr̥tti, see Torella
1994.

MM = Mahārthamañjarī of Maheśvarānanda with the Auto-commentary
‘Parimala’, ed. Pt. Vrajavallabha Dviveda, Yogatantra-Granthamālā vol.
5, Varanasi: Sampurnanand Sanskrit University, 1992.

MNP = Mahānayaprakāśa of Śitikaṇṭha with commentary, ed. Mukund Ram
Śastri, Kashmir Śaivism Texts Studies, 1918.

MNP-T = Mahānayaprakāśa, anonymous, ed. K. Śambasiva Śastri, Trivandrum
Sanskrit Series 130, 1937.

SC = Stavacintāmaṇi of Bhaṭṭanārāyaṇa, see Silburn 1964.

ŚSĀ = Śivastotrāvalī of Utpaladeva, see Bailly 1987.

ŚSA-K = Śivastotrāvalī of Utpaladevācārya with the Sanskrit Commentary
of Kṣemarāja, edited with Hindi commentary by Rājānaka Lakṣmaṇa,
Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series, Varanasi, 1964.

TĀ = Tantrāloka of Abhinavagupta, with the Commentary of Jayaratha, ed.
R.C. Dwivedi and N. Rastogi, 8 vols., Delhi: Motilal Banarasidass, 1987.

Vātūlanāthasūtra of Anantaśaktipāda with Vr̥tti (KSTS 29), Bombay, 1923.

Studies and Translations

Bailly, Constantina Rhodes, 1987, Shaiva Devotional Songs of Kashmir: A
Translation and Study of Utpaladeva’s Shivastotravali, Albany: State
University of New York Press.

Sanderson, Alexis, 2007, “The Śaiva Exegesis of Kashmir”, in Tantric
Studies in Memory of Hélène Brunner, ed. D. Goodall, A. Padoux,
Collection Indologie 106, Pondicherry: Institut Français
d’Indologie/École française d’Ěxteme-Orient, pp. 231-442.

———, 1988, “Śaivism and the Tantric Traditions”, in Stewart
Sutherland/Leslie Houlden/Peter Clarke/Friedhelm Hardy (eds.) The
World’s Religions, New York/London: Routledge, pp. 668-97.

SenSharma, DebaBrata, 1990, The Philosophy of Sadhānā: With Special
Reference to the Trika Philosophy of Kashmir, Albany: State University
of New York Press.

Silburn, Lilian, 1964, La Bhakti: Le Stavacintāmaṇi de Bhaṭṭanārāyaṇa,
texte traduit et commenté, Éditions de Boccard, Paris.

Smith, Frederick M., 2009, Deity and Spirit Possession in South Asia,
Delhi: Motilal Banarasidass.

Torella, Raffaele, 1994, The Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikā of Utpaladeva with
the Author’s Vr̥tti, critical edition and annotated translation, Serie
Orientale Roma 71, Roma.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Cf. TĀ III.69 and Jayaratha’s commentary.

2 According to Sanderson, that Somānanda might have not been the author
of the Śivadr̥ṣṭi. If he were, Abhinavagupta would have addressed him in
a more reverential way, as he often does in other passages by affixing
the respectful pādāḥ to Somānanda’s name, [Sanderson 2007: 353].

3 Cf. ĪPVr̥ [Torella 1994: xiv].

4 Cf. Sanderson 1988: 668-89; Torella 1994: xiv.

5 I am immensely grateful to Bettina Bäumer for her suggestion to read
Kṣemarāja’s commentary on the Śivastotrāvalī (ŚSĀ-K) which she kindly
put at my disposal.

6 MM, stanza 58.

7 Ibid. commentary on stanza 68.

8 A similar example of the Pratyabhijñā’s apodicticity within the
Krama-Kaula construction is found in the anonymous Mahānayaprakāśa
edited by Śambaśiva Śāstrī in the Trivandrum Sanskrit Series (MP-T).

9 The Kālīkramapañcāśikā attributed to Niṣkriyānanda whom
Devīpañcaśatikā acknowledges as one of the first preceptors of the
Kālīkrama tradition describes the core of the Kālīkrama teachings in the
following words: “Kālī is the energy of the Sun (bhānavī) consisting of
the Twelve Risen Suns. Terrible, she manifests Time. This is the
Kālikākrama.” Cf. CMSS MS Kh, MS Gh 7.205ab.

10 Cf. ĪPV 1.5.14.

11 Cf. SenSharma 1990:130.

12 Cf. ĪPV 4.1.12, tr. Torella. This verse is quoted in the MM,
commentary on stanza 60.

13 Ibid.

14 ŚSĀ 9.6.

15 ŚSĀ 12.17.

16 Ibid.

17 Ibid. 5.25.

18 Ibid. 15.1.

19 Ibid. 17.11.

20 The condition of permanence (sthiti) is the inexplicable (anākhya),
it is the sun of consciousness (cit-arka), the freedom of Śiva who makes
creation, etc. (sr̥ṣṭi, etc.) manifest and dissolve away. Abhinavagupta
drew description of the highest state of the Goddess Kālasaṁkarṣaṇī
understood as the condition of permanence (sthiti) from the
Devīpañcaśatikā and the Yonigahvaratantra. Abhinavagupta acknowledged
the former as an authoritative text in the Kālīkrama.

21 ĪPVr̥ intro, p. xxix.

22 ŚSĀ 5.8.

23 Ibid. 1.10.

24 A similar description we find in the Mahānayaprakāśa (MNP) of
Śitikaṇṭha 12.4-6: “The object of experience is the favourite place of
the goddesses of the senses (khecarīvāhadevīs) who delight in consuming
it (upabhoga). When these goddesses of the senses have relished the
field of objectivity, they offer it to the Bhairava who is Consciousness
(Cidbhairava). Then, after offering themselves, they abandon it and come
to rest. This is the foundation of the enjoyment of worldly experience
(viṣayabhoga).”

25 ŚSĀ 2.23.

26 ŚSĀ-K: 32.

27 TĀ IV 122b-181a.

28 tvanmukhaṁ tripathanetri ! bhātmakaṁ śaktivr̥ndam iha turyathāgamam
(yad yathāgamam) । dvādaśa kramapadaṁ padādibhir jr̥mbhitaṁ jagati
taccatustrikaiḥ ।। — CGC 36

29 MNP ̵T 9.28-9.33.

30 ŚSĀ 16.27.

31 Ibid. 7.6.

32 Ibid. 16.6. Also Abhinavagupta in his commentary on the Dhvanyāloka
of Ānandavardhana describes bhakti as “absorption (āveśa) in that Lord
whose nature is the highest form of the self”, in The Dhvanyāloka of
Ānandavardhana with the Locana of Abhinavagupta [ed. Ingalls, Masson and
Patwardhan 1990], quoted in Smith 2009: 346.

33 ŚSĀ-K 5.13.

34 Cf. ĪPVr̥: 118-19.

35 MNP-T 2.34, 2.39.

36 Kālīkulapañcaśatakā (Devīpañcaśatikā) 4.6-4.8, MS no. 5-358.

37 MNP-T 2.25.

38 Ibid. Anantaśaktipāda in his commentary on the Aphorisms on the Mad
Lord (Vātūlanāthasūtra) explains that the great union (mahāmelāpa)
taking place between the siddhas and yoginīs in the ritual assembly
(cakra) is the mutual connection between the perceiving subject
(grāhaka) and perceived object (grāhya) conjoined within and by means of
the circle of sense-organs. Siddhas and yoginīs represent deities of the
sense-organs and the object of the senses fused in pulsating union
during every particular act of cognition. In this way, the great union
(mahāmelāpa) is the great fusion (mahāsāmarasya) abiding constantly and
everywhere in the absolute void of consciousness (niruttaracidvyomni)
where differentiation between objectivity and subjectivity ceases
completely. Cf. Vātūlanāthasūtra with Anantaśaktipāda’s Vr̥tti (KSTS 29),
Bombay, 1923, verse 5.

39 ŚSĀ 16.29.

40 ŚSĀ 17.1.

41 In this way Maheśvarānanda specifies that practice of the empowered
means (śāktopāya) is based on the application of the kulayāga which
results in tasting the nectar and ultimately leads an aspirant to the
experience of absorption into the supreme bliss of the śāmbhava state.
Cf. MM stanza 58.

42 ŚSĀ 2.9.

43 Ibid. 2.27.

44 Ibid. 6.6.

45 Ibid. 17.43-44.

46 Ibid. 17.16. (tr. Bailly).

47 MNP-T 5.1-5.12

48 ŚSĀ 11.15.

49 Ibid. 6.4.

50 ŚSĀ 6.3.

51 CMSS 7.175.

52 MNP of Śitikaṇṭha 3.5-6.

Appendix I*

Studies on Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vivr̥ti

Part I: Anupalabdhi and Apoha in a Śaiva Garb**

Raffaele Torella

At the outset of an article published in 1988, I noted that the
Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vivr̥ti or ṭīkā (henceforth Vivr̥ti) would deserve a
prominent place in any imaginary catalogue of the lost works of Indian
philosophical literature (Torella 1988: 137). Thirteen years later, in
which the Pratyabhijñā school of the Kashmirian Śaivādvaita has
continued to be one of my preferred fields of research, I would still
fully subscribe to that earlier statement. The role of Utpaladeva’s long
commentary on his Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Kārikā (ĪPK) as the real centre of
gravity of Pratyabhijñā philosophy has become, in fact, clearer and
clearer, though the later Śaiva philosophical tradition chose instead
Abhinavagupta’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vimarśinī (ĪPV) as the standard text.
This brilliant and more compact and accessible text was copied again and
again over the centuries and became popular in south India too, where a
number of manuscripts in the principal southern scripts are still
available. The success of a particular commentary is very often the
indirect cause of the decline of others, which are less and less read
and, consequently, copied, until they are completely or almost
completely lost. One could mention, among others, the particularly
exemplary case of the Yuktidīpikā on the Sāṁkhya-Kārikā that has come
down to us in a very few copies.

I need not repeat here what I have already said elsewhere on the nature
of the Vivr̥ti and its relation to the other commentaries.1 Suffice it to
recall that Utpaladeva is said to have composed the ĪPK and the concise
Vr̥tti at the same time, and later on to have devoted an analytic
commentary to the complex of Kārikā–Vr̥tti, i.e. our Vivr̥ti (or Ṭīkā), in
which he discussed possible alternative views and rejected them, also
indulging in occasionally quite long digressions on particular subjects.

The only mention of an extant fragmentary manuscript of the Vivr̥ti
occurred in K.C. Pandey’s pioneering book on Abhinavagupta and the
so-called Kashmir Shaivism (Pandey 1963: 69-70; see also Torella 1988:
141). Though the original manuscript was apparently lost, a transcript
of it, by Pandey’s own hand, was found among the papers left by the
learned scholar upon his demise and kept by his widow on behalf of the
Abhinavagupta Institute, University of Lucknow. During my visit to
Lucknow in 1987, Mrs Lila Pandey and the Trustees of the Institute were
so kind as to show me the notebook with the transcript, but did not
allow me to copy or photograph it, except for a small portion (10 pages
out of 49), which I edited and translated in the above-mentioned
article. My efforts in later years to secure the entire transcript were,
despite the good offices of N. Rastogi and J.P. Sinha, totally
unsuccessful. By now, Pandey’s transcript is to be considered
definitively lost.

The good fortune that sometimes helps scholars in their research,
counteracting the obstacles set up by human unhelpfulness, took me in
1998 to the India National Archives in Delhi in search of the
manuscripts used by the paṇḍits of the Srinagar Research Department for
the editions of the Kashmir Series. I was interested in those
manuscripts because of the important marginal notes that some of them
contained, where I assumed to find quotations from lost Kashmiri works.
When I chanced upon a Śāradā manuscript, entitled Pratyabhijñā-Vivr̥ti
(Skt. ms No. 30), belonging to a small fund of manuscripts that the
Maharaja of Jammu & Kashmir had transmitted to the National Archives in
1948, I began looking through it with the same scepticism with which I
had in the past looked through manuscripts with the same title all over
India (in all cases, the title had simply been the outcome of careless
cataloguing). Very soon, however, I realized that what I had in front of
me was precisely the original of Pandey’s transcript, as described by
him on the very first page of his notebook.2 Once the transcript had
become irretrievably lost to us, the original came to light again.

The thirty-three folios of the manuscript cover the full text of ĪPK
1.3.6 through 1.5.3 along with Utpaladeva’s Vr̥tti and Vivr̥ti, plus
Abhinavagupta’s Vimarśinī. The manuscript begins with the Vimarśinī’s
bhūmikā to ĪPK I.3.6 (saṁskāre saty api smr̥tiḥ [. . .], vol. 1, p. 103,
l. 6) and ends abruptly with iha bodhas tāvad abhinnaḥ prakāśamātram eva
hy asya paramā-<rthaḥ>, i.e. the first line of the Vimarśinī on ĪPK
I.5.4-5 (vol. 1, p. 135, ll. 5-6). Although the portion of the recovered
text is comparatively short, it proves to be particularly important for
the study of Pratyabhijñā philosophy since some very crucial points are
dealt with there at great length. Among them, we find the nature of
cognition, its being self-aware, the impossibility of a cognition’s
becoming the object of another cognition, the necessity for the various
cognitions to rest on a single substratum for a connection between
cognitions to be possible, and the necessity for cognition and its
object to share the same essential nature, i.e., “light”. Utpaladeva,
and after him Abhinavagupta, progressively attain their final position
by means of a very interesting dialogue, mainly with the Buddhist
pramāṇa tradition and the Vijñānavāda, with the participation of the
Mīmāṁsakas (Bhāṭṭas and Prābhākaras) on specific points.

In this contribution I am continuing, after an interval of thirteen
years, my above-mentioned article, which contained the edition and
translation of the full text of the Vivr̥ti on ĪPK 1.3.6 up to the
beginning of the Vivr̥ti on ĪPK 1.3.7. The present article is devoted to
the edition and translation of the full text of the Vivr̥ti on ĪPK 1.3.7.

The third āhnika of ĪPK deals with the untenability of the opponent’s
theses as regards the unification of cognitions, which alone renders all
human experiences (vyavahāra) possible (cf. the relevant colophon of the
Vimarśinī [ĪPV I: 112]: paradarśanānupapattir nāma tr̥tīyam āhnikam). The
theses of the opponents were presented in the previous āhnika (ibid.:
89: pūrvapakṣavivr̥tir nāma dvitīyam āhnikam). In order to better
understand the content of v. 1.3.6 of the ĪPK, we must read it together
with the previous verse, to which it is closely connected (tr. Torella
2002: 102-03):

Thus, the functioning of the human world — which stems precisely from
the unification (anusandhāna) of cognitions, in themselves separate from
each other and incapable of knowing one another — would be destroyed . .
. (I.3.6) . . . if there were no Maheśvara who contains within himself
all the infinite forms, who is one, whose essence is consciousness,
possessing the powers of knowledge, memory and exclusion (I.3.7).

Utpaladeva’s final aim is to establish a single cosmic consciousness,
i.e. Śiva, as the common background of all reality and, particularly, of
all human experiences. He pursues this intention not by apodictically
stating the Śaiva truth — for example, by resorting to the authority of
revealed texts — but by critically examining diametrically opposed
doctrines, i.e. those of the Buddhist pramāṇa philosophers. In doing so,
he recognizes the leading position of the Buddhist philosophy in the
Kashmir of his day and at the same time shows that he is not afraid of
challenging the great cultural prestige of the Buddhist doctrines.
Moreover, in many cases he makes use, as far as possible, of their
arguments to preliminarily build up and then refine his own position.
This way of carrying out the “duel” with the pramāṇa philosophers
reminds one of the attitude often found in oriental martial arts.
Instead of directly attacking his adversary, Utpaladeva seeks to exploit
the adversary’s intellectual ability to finally turn it back upon him.
The main technique on which Utpaladeva’s argumentation is based is the
one well known in śāstric debate as prasaṅga-viparyaya. The Buddhist
ideas are not rejected at the outset but are rather apparently accepted
and then pushed to their extreme consequences.

As a result, the Buddhist opponent is finally confronted with two
alternatives: either to abandon his own specific theses or, if he is
still convinced of them (and, interestingly, this is the case not only
for the Buddhist, but for the Śaiva philosopher himself), to change the
perspective from which they are to be viewed. In other words, he should
accept the overall theoretical Śaiva framework precisely to safeguard
his own Buddhist ideas.3

The main part of the Vivr̥ti passage edited here is devoted to the
discussion of the Buddhist concepts of “non-perception” (anupalabdhi)
and, less extensively, of “exclusion” (apoha) as the very core of
conceptual thought. If one accepts the self-contained nature of
cognition (as the Buddhist does), it becomes impossible to account for
either of them. On seeing an empty surface we would not be allowed to
say that there is no jar there because the cognition of a certain object
would not be able to give rise to, at the same time, alternative
cognitions later to be rejected. Yet the world of human knowledge,
language and practical activity has among its pillars precisely the
possibility of taking something for “absent”, or of building mental
images by way of exclusion. Furthermore, granted that the Buddhist
description of how an individual cognition works in isolation is
considered as basically correct, the capability of the individual
cognitions to communicate with each other, to enter into a network, is
required. Such a “network” cannot be provided but by the single and
unitary consciousness in which all of them are rooted, in a word: by the
Śiva-nature which permeates reality, constituting its ultimate ground.

Both the topics of anupalabdhi and apoha will receive a separate and
extensive treatment later on in the ĪPK (see I.7.7-11 for anupalabdhi
and 1.6.1-5 for apoha). Here they are preliminarily discussed from a
particular viewpoint, i.e. as exemplary grounds for the necessity to
postulate a single consciousness-principle (in the case of anupalabdhi)
and a basic “universal” stuff in everything (in the case of apoha). The
Buddhists account for the establishment of the absence of a jar in a
certain place by saying that the cognition of the empty place, being
aware of itself as opposed to the cognition of the place together with a
jar, is also aware of the place as “devoid of a jar”. In fact, if a jar
were present in a certain place, the jar would also be manifested in the
cognition of the place since both the jar and the place share the same
capacity [of being perceptible] (tulyayogyatārūpatvāt). This can be
maintained, the Buddhists go on, because particulars belonging to the
same class (i.e. “visible” particulars) are grasped by one and the same
cognition (here a “visual” cognition), and, consequently, in the case of
a jar being there, the cognition of the place should also contain a
manifestation of the jar; but in the case at issue, this is not so.
Utpaladeva points out that we are dealing here with two distinct and
separate cognitions, which are bound to remain so: the one can by no
means include or exclude the other, unless one intends to explain the
establishment of the absence of a jar in terms of inference, which is
not assumed by the Buddhists (see Torella 2002: 143 n. 17). These and
other arguments are taken into account in the text (see below). To
summarize, each cognition sheds light on itself alone; or, in other
words, each cognition has its own self-awareness (svasaṁvedana), which
can by no means act as a common basis where two distinct cognitions may
meet. No single cognition, Utpaladeva concludes, not even perceptual
cognition, can by itself establish the absence of something. The only
way to fill the gap between cognitions and in this way give a reasonable
explanation of the establishment of “absences” which is so common in
everyday life is to accept their resting on a single consciousness.
Instead of a multiplicity of unrelated svasaṁvedanas each corresponding
to a single cognition, Utpaladeva posits the one supreme
consciousness-principle as the common svasaṁvedana of all cognitions,
which in this way derive from it the capacity to enter into relation
with each other.

The starting point for the discussion of the apoha issue is clearly
stated in Abhinavagupta’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vivr̥ti-Vimarśinī (ĪPVV I:
292, 9ff.): Why, on the appearance of a particular object, should one
figure out something different destined to be excluded later (nanu
svalakṣaṇe ’vabhāte kuto ’tadrūpam āśaṅkyate yad apohyate)?
Abhinavagupta is not satisfied with Dharmakīrti’s answer, elaborated at
length in the Svārthānumānapariccheda chapter of his Pramāṇa-Vārttika
and Svavr̥tti: the correct knowledge of the particular (svalakṣaṇa) is
continually threatened by erroneous superimpositions (samāropa), caused,
e.g. by misleading similarities — such as the brightness equally found
in mother-of-pearl and in silver — which make the knower mistake one
thing for another. The doubt which projects alternative objective forms
to be negated would arise precisely because the knower is aware of the
fact that in principle many superimpositions are possible; thus a
definite ascertainment becomes possible only after hypothetical mistaken
forms are preliminarily rejected. Subsequently, Abhinavagupta takes into
account the position of Śaṅkaranandana (ll. 18ff.), who in his
Apohasiddhi recognizes prasaṅga, i.e. the mere possibility that a thing
be different from itself (?) (anyathā-prasaṅga), as the cause of doubt.4
Both samāropa and prasaṅga are untenable for Abhinavagupta because, no
matter whether they derive from beginningless nescience or from other
causes, they ultimately lead to a regressus ad infinitum.

Utpaladeva puts forward his own version of how apoha works, taking for
granted that apoha is indeed the pivot of all conceptual thought. His
view, evidently nourished by Buddhist ideas, is centred on the plurality
of causal efficiencies found in any object, an idea he substitutes for
that of the plurality of wrong assumptions (vikalpa, samāropa), with
respect to which Abhinavagupta will clearly explicate the fault of
infinite regress (anavasthā) (cf. below, n 68) already implicit in
Utpaladeva’s argument. But, more importantly, he makes an additional
remark. On the level of māyā, on which alone discursive thought
(vikalpa) is at work, the objects should be at their highest level of
differentiation; then, how can their cognition also evoke “other”
objects? Utpaladeva’s answer is rooted in Śaiva theology. The
īśvaratattva-level on which the whole manifested world is still enclosed
in the I (sarvam idam aham) remains so to speak in the background even
in the world of māyā, which is marked by full-fledged differentiation.
This is especially true for the process of cognition, in which even the
fully differentiated object ends up flowing into consciousness and being
absorbed into it; moreover, as is often repeated by the Śaiva
philosophers, if the object were not essentially light, it could not at
all shine in cognition (cf. ĪPVV I: 294, ll. 18-20: sa hy eko ’pi bhāvo
vastuto ’nyaiḥ saha tadātmaiva yadyapi māyāśaktyā pr̥thakkr̥taḥ, tathāpi
bhātatvād eva anyonyātmatām unmīlayati; see also p. 296, ll. 5-8). This
latent basic non-differentiation of the object (from other objects and
from the Self) is, according to Utpaladeva, what finally renders the
process of apoha possible, the potential “openness” of the object (and
the subject) being the very ground for the “doubt” about it. On this
premise alone, the Buddhist apoha is accepted by the Śaivas, who take it
as a particular śakti figuring side by side with jñāna-śakti.

Text5

[f. 4v,16] vivr̥tau — yujyeta6 punar etādr̥śo vyavahāro yady eṣām
anubhavasmr̥tyādīnāṁ cinmātrasāratvenaika evātmā syāt, yasyaitā
viśvātmanaḥ parameśvarasya jñānādikā vicitrāḥ śaktayaḥ,7 anyathā tu na
syād iti ।।

na ced antaḥkr̥tānanta [f. 5r] viśvarūpo maheśvaraḥ ।

syād ekaś cidvapur jñānasmr̥tyapohanaśaktimān ।। [1.3.7]

[Vimarśinī follows] [f. 6r,4] atra vr̥ttiḥ — cittattvam eva viśvarūpam
ato ’tiriktasyānupapatter aśeṣapadārthajñānānām anyonyānusandhānam
asyaiva jñānādiśaktayaḥ, mattaḥ smr̥tir jñānam apohanaṁ ceti hy uktam ।।

vivr̥tiḥ — prakāśarūpaṁ8 hi cittattvaṁ kartr̥tāmayam ādisiddham eva
tadatiriktatvaṁ ca nīlasukhāder jaḍābhimatasya bhāva9jātasya svayam
aprakāśarūpatvaṁ syād atadrūpatve ca prakāśamānatānupapattiḥ, na hy
aśvetarūpaḥ prakāśaḥ śveta iti bhavaty etac copapādayiṣyate10 । tad āha
cittattvam evety ato ’tiriktasyeti ca । bhinnāvabhāsinām api cārthānāṁ
cidekarūpatve tadviṣayāṇāṁ jñānānām avivādasiddham eva tadātmakatvam, na
hi tāni tato bhedena prathante, tathāpi11 viṣayabhedāvakalpita-12
bhedānām api teṣāṁ vibhinnadeśakālāvacchede ’py
ekacin-mayasvabhāvaviśrāntir eva । anyathā sarveṣām eva jñānānām
ekasvasaṁvedanarūpāntarmukhacittattvamayasvabhāvābhāve
kevalapradeśajñānaprakāśasamaye saghaṭapradeśajñānaṁ nāstīti kathaṁ
ni[f. 6v]ścīyate, jñānānāṁ svaprakāśarūpatayā
ghaṭādiviṣa-yavadekajñānasaṁsargitvābhāvāt ।

kevalapradeśe hi ghaṭo yadi syāt, tat tatra pradeśajñāne
tulyayogyatārūpatvāt so ’pi prakāśeta tathā ca saghaṭapradeśajñānam etat
syāt, na kevalapradeśajñānam; ataḥ kevalapradeśajñānaṁ svātmānaṁ
saghaṭapradeśajñānaviparītaṁ saṁvedayamānaṁ pradeśam api ghaṭarahitaṁ
saṁvedayate iti ghaṭābhāvasiddhiḥ pradeśe syāt ।

yāvatā kevalapradeśajñānena yadi nāma svātmā
saghaṭapradeśa-jñānaviparītaḥ saṁviditas tato dvitīyam arthāntarabhūtaṁ
saghaṭa-13 pradeśajñānaṁ svaprakāśarūpaṁ nāstīti kathaṁ sidhyet ।

ghaṭo nāstīti kāmaṁ sidhyet, anyathā ghaṭāsadbhāve tasyaiva
pradeśajñānasya saghaṭapradeśajñānatāpattiprasaṅgāt । na ca tat
saghaṭapradeśajñānam, api tu tadviparītam,14 atas tajjñānasaṁvedyo nāsti
ghaṭa iti bhavet ।

dvitīyaṁ tu saghaṭapradeśajñānaṁ nāstīti kena jñātaṁ yatas15
tajjñānasaṁvedyaḥ syād api tatra ghaṭaḥ, na ca tatra dvitīyaṁ
saghaṭapradeśajñānaṁ yadi syāt tan16 na prakāśeta, na ca prakāśate ’to
nāstīti vaktuṁ yujyate tad eva hi paryanuyuktam ।

katham etaj jñānam aghaṭapradeśajñā[f. 7r]ne17 prakāśata iti tu tenaiva
svaprakāśena svātmā tathā jñāyeta, ghaṭe yadvad aghaṭābhāvarūpatā ।

dvitīyaṁ tu saghaṭapradeśajñānam arthāntarabhūtam aghaṭa-18
pradeśajñānābhāvam api na na19 vyabhicarati yena tatprakāśād eva
saghaṭapradeśajñānābhāvo ’pi jñāyeta, dvitīyārthāntarabhūtasaghaṭa-
pradeśajñānabhāvābhāvayor api tasyāghaṭa20
pradeśajñānapra-kāśasyopapatter ekatarā21navyabhicārāt ।

atha saghaṭapradeśajñānaṁ ghaṭamātrajñānaṁ vā na pradeśajñānād bhinnaṁ
sambhavaty ekajātīyarūpaviśeṣaviṣayasyāpi cākṣuṣasyaikatvaniyamāt,
anyathā ghaṭe ’pi pratiparamāṇujñāna-bhedāpatter ghaṭābhāsa eva na syād
ityādiyuktibhis tat kevala-pradeśajñānam evedaṁ ghaṭe sati
ghaṭapratibhāsam api syāt, na ca tatheti tata eva kathaṁ na
ghaṭajñānābhāvasiddhiḥ ।

tad evam iyannyāyānusaraṇād ānumāniky eva ghaṭābhāvasiddhiḥ syāt, na
prātyakṣī. yadi vā samandhakāre22 rūpajñānaṁ nāstīti kathaṁ jñāyeta,
tarhy atraitad api vaktuṁ yujyeta23 +yadi rūpajñānaṁ syāt tad etat
sparśādijñānābhinnam eva syād+ [my tentative restoration: yadi
rūpajñānaṁ tattatsparśādijñānābhinnam eva syād] iti rūpasparśajñānānāṁ
bhinnendriyajanyānām anekatvenaivopagamāt ।

nāpy uttarakālotpannavikalpaḥ24 smr̥tir vā sparśa-jñānamātrābhāsā
rūpajñānābhāvāvyabhicāriṇī25 tam api sādhayati, yato26 rūpasyāpi tadā
sadbhāve yathā[f. 7v]sau sparśajñānābhāsā tathā rūpajñānābhāsā caiva27
syāt, na caivaṁ tadātmānaṁ sparśajñānamātrābhāsaṁ saṁvedayamānāpi
rūpajñānābhāsavivekaṁ sādhayatīti । tato yady api svātmani
rūpajñānābhāsaṁ vyavacchindyāt saṁvedyamānākāraviparītatvāt tathāpi
pūrvaṁ sparśajñānamātraprakāśakāle rūpajñānaṁ nābhūd iti kathaṁ jānīyāt,
sparśamātrajñānasya tatra parisphurataḥ pūrvoktanyāyena
dvitīyarūpajñānābhāvāvyabhicārābhāvāt28 । smārtaṁ hi vijñānaṁ
pūrvānubhavasaṁskārajaṁ pūrvānu-bhavānusāreṇaiva vyavasthāpakaṁ bhavati,
na tu svātantryeṇa pūrvapravr̥ttānubhavabhedasākṣātkāri sad yena
svātmany29 ābhāsamānākāraviparītaṁ rūpajñānaṁ pūrvasmin kāle
vyavacchindan viṣayam api pūrvabhāvinaṁ vyavacchindyāt, yathā
pradeśamātrajñānaṁ svātmani saghaṭa-30 pradeśābhāsatāvyavacchedena bahir
ghaṭam api vyavacchinattīty āhuḥ । tato vikalpajñānaṁ
pūrvānubhavasaṁskārāt tadanusāri jāyamānam, yathā tatpūrvānubhavadvayaṁ
pr̥thakpr̥thakprakāśam ekaprakāśasaṁsargarahitam āsīt, tathānubhūtam31
anubhavāmīti ca tat parāmr̥śati ।

tataś cobhayaparāmarśe ’pi
tatsvaprakāśasparśarūpajñāna-dvayamātravyavasthānaṁ syāt,32 na tv
ekakālikatvena yena tad andhakārakālagatasparśajñānamātraṁ
tātkālikarūpajñānavimuktaṁ svābhāsopārūḍhaṁ [f. 8r] parāmr̥śad api
tadandhakārakāle rūpajñānaṁ nirākuryāt । yāvatā jñānānām
anyonyaprakāśarahitānāṁ svātmamātrapratiṣṭhānāṁ yathā na svayaṁ
tulyakālatāvyavasthāpanaṁ tathā vikalpenāpi tatsaṁskārajanmanā
svarūpamātraprakāśakānekajñāna-33 parāmarśakena naikakālavyavasthāpanaṁ
śakyaṁ pūrvānubhūtātiriktavastusaṁsparśisaṁvedanatvābhāvāt tasya, na
cāpi pūrvānubhūtavastusaṁsparśitvam api vikalpānāṁ ghaṭata ity uktam ।
tad evam ekāntarmukhasvasaṁveda- narūpacittattvātmatāviśrāntiṁ vinā
jñānānām aindriya-kāṇām apy anyonyaṁ sahabhāvapr̥thagbhāvaprakāśo na syād
ity arthānām api sadasattāniyamaniścayo na syāt, tataś ca
sarvavyavahārocchedaprasaṅgaḥ । tasmād eṣām ekacittattvaviśrāntirūpam
anusandhānam avaśyābhyupagantavyam । tad āha aśeṣapadārthajñānānām iti
jñānānāṁ bahūnām anusandhānam eva cittattvam ity anena ekaśabdo ’pi
vivr̥taḥ ।

smr̥tyādau34 cānekānubhavānām anusandhānam eka-cittattvaviśrāntir evāta
evābhedenātra cittattvam anusandhānam iti tasya caivam avibhedena
vakṣyamāṇanayenāśeṣabhāvanirbharasya35 tattadvicitrabhāvāvabhāsanāmayaṁ
jñānaṁ nāma śaktir eva । phalabhedāropitabhedo36 hi padārthātmaiva
śaktir ucyate sā ca śaktiḥ svecchā[f. 8v]vaśenaiva na punar
anyakāraṇasāmarthyasācivyena yasya phalati37 sa maheśvara iti sūtre
tathā nirdiṣṭaḥ । cittattvasya caikarūpatvam agre pratipādayiṣyate ।38
smr̥tir api pūrvāvabhāsitavastunaḥ pūrvāvabhāsitatvena vartamānakāle
prakhyāpanaśaktiḥ । deśakālaviśeṣāvacchedaśūnyatvena
vicitrecchābodhitā39vabhāsabhedavāsanāmātropapāditavikal-
parūpavijñānāpohanaśaktiḥ śaṅkitapratipakṣapratikṣepaparatvād vikalpānām
। padārthāntarasamparkarahite ’py arthe pratiniyataprakr̥tāv avabhāte40
vividhārthakriyākāriṇy api viśiṣṭaikārthakriyārthina īśvarāṅgabhūta
ivānyonyātmatayā
śaṅkyamānatattadarthakriyākāritattatpratipakṣanirākriyāṁ vinā na tena
vyavahartum alaṁ pratipattāra iti svabhāva evaiteṣāṁ41 padārthānām
anyonyabhedamayatvāt ।

tad viśvavyavahāraprajanaiṣā vikalpavyāpārāpohanaśaktir iti gītāsu
bhagavatāviṣṭamaheśvarabhāvena parigaṇitā । tad āha mattaḥ smr̥tir iti ।
etac ca jñānaśaktibhedāt ।।

Translation

Vivr̥ti: On the contrary, such a world of practical experience
(vyavahāraḥ) will become possible (yujyeta)42 — if all the various
cognitions — direct perception, memory, etc. — have only one intrinsic
nature (ātmā),43 being in essence consciousness only. Of this [ātman],
namely the Supreme Lord, whose essence is all, these cognitions, etc.,
represent the various and multiform powers.44 [The world of practical
experience] would otherwise be impossible.

Kārikā: “. . . if there were no Maheśvara who contains within Himself
all the infinite forms, who is one, whose essence is consciousness,
possessing the powers of knowledge, memory and exclusion.” [1.3.7]

Vr̥tti: The mutual unification of all cognitions of things is
[constituted by] the consciousness principle itself (cittattvam) whose
form is all, since nothing distinct and separate (atiriktasya) from it
is admissible. The powers of knowledge, etc. only pertain to this
[consciousness-principle]. For it has been said: “From me derive memory,
knowledge and exclusion.”45

Vivr̥ti: For the consciousness-principle, whose form is light,
constituted by agency, is established since the very beginning. If the
world of objects, such as a patch of blue colour or pleasure,
[erroneously] assumed as being insentient, were separate from it, this
would [amount to saying] that its nature is not by itself light. But if
[things] did not have light as their essence, their shining would be
impossible, for, as we are going to demonstrate,46 a light which is not
white47 cannot become white. This concept has been expressed [by the
Vr̥tti] with the phrases “the consciousness-principle itself” and
“distinct and separate from it”. If the objects, though appearing as
differentiated [from consciousness], are to be recognized as constituted
solely by consciousness, it is established beyond discussion that [also]
the cognitions which refer to them are made of consciousness.48 For
cognitions never manifest themselves separately from it; all the same,49
though they (i.e. the cognitions) may show [a certain level of]
differentiation somehow induced (avakalpita)50 by the differentiation of
their contents, yet, despite this delimitation due to spatio-temporal
differences, they ultimately do rest (viśrāntir eva)51 on their own
nature consisting of a single and unitary consciousness (ekacit).52 If
it were not so, and all the various cognitions did not have as their
essential nature the consciousness-principle, introverted, in the form
of a single and unitary self-awareness (eka-svasaṁvedana), how could
one, at the moment when the cognition of an empty surface occurs, arrive
at the statement “There is no jar here” [lit.: “This is not the
cognition of a surface with a jar”]? For cognitions, being by their very
nature conscious of themselves [alone], cannot combine to form a single
[complex] cognition (ekajñānasaṁsargitvābhāva)53 having as its object a
jar and so on.54

[Buddhist:] In fact, if a jar were in an empty place, then also the
[jar] would be manifested in the cognition of the place since [both the
jar and the place] share the same capacity [of being perceptible]
(tulyayogyatārūpatva),55 and in this way it would be the cognition of a
place with a jar, not the cognition of an empty place. Therefore, the
cognition of an empty place, being aware of itself as opposed to the
cognition of a place with a jar, is also aware of the place as devoid of
a jar. In this way the absence of a jar in the place can indeed be
established.

[Śaiva:] But if the cognition of an empty place is aware [only] of
itself as opposed to the cognition of the place with a jar, how would it
be possible to establish that there is not a second56 cognition — which
is another fact-event (arthāntarabhūta) — having the place with a jar as
its object and being manifest by itself?

[Buddhist:] It is none the less true that, some way or other, one should
be able to affirm that a jar is absent, for otherwise it would ensue
that when there is no jar that very cognition of the place [without a
jar] would be the same as the cognition of the place with a jar.
However, that cognition would not be the cognition of the place with a
jar, but a cognition opposed to it;57 hence we would have: “There is no
jar being cognized by that cognition.”

[Śaiva:] But by which cognitive act is a second (dvitīyam) (i.e.
distinct and separate)58 cognition of the place with a jar cognized as
not being there, thanks to which [one could say that] the jar, being
potentially cognized by that same cognition, should also have been
there? If such a distinct and separate cognition were there, it could
not but be manifested (na ca . . . na prakāśeta), whereas, on the
contrary, it is not manifested. Therefore, one cannot reasonably say
that it exists.59 In fact, this is precisely what has been questioned.

[Buddhist:] But to him who might wonder how this cognition can be
manifested when [only] the cognition of the place without a jar occurs,
we would reply that it is cognized by that (i.e. the latter’s) very
self-awareness, just as when there is a jar, its being there has the
form of the not-being-there of a non-jar.60

[Śaiva:] However, the distinct and separate cognition of the place with
a jar, which is “another” fact-event, is not also invariably accompanied
by the absence of the cognition of the place without a jar, so that
simply from the manifesting of the latter61 one could also cognize the
absence of the cognition of the place with a jar.62 For, even as regards
the presence and the absence of a distinct and separate cognition of the
place with a jar which is “another” fact/event, there is no invariable
concomitance with either [the absence or the presence of the cognition
of the place without the jar], since the cognition of the place without
a jar is manifested [in both cases].63

[Buddhist:] But the cognition of the place with the jar or the cognition
of the jar alone cannot occur separately from the cognition of the
place, since a visual cognition having particulars belonging to the same
class as its objects is by necessity unitary.64 If it were not so, also
with reference to a jar the manifestation “jar” itself would not take
place because one would come to have a single and separate cognition for
every single atom.65 Therefore, from these arguments and others of this
kind it ensues that this cognition of the place alone should, in the
case of a jar being there, also contain the manifestation of the jar.
But [in the case at issue] it is not so.66 Due to this very reason, the
establishment of the absence of the cognition of a jar cannot be
questioned.

[Śaiva:]67 Thus, if we accept your argument as following such a line of
reasoning, the absence of a jar comes to be established by means of
inference (ānumāniky eva), not by means of direct perception (na
prātyakṣī).68 If, on the other hand, someone [i.e. a Buddhist] objected
that on these conditions one could not [even] say when one is in
continuous darkness that there is no cognition of a visible form, [we
would reply that] in this case this too69 would be admissible, provided
that such a cognition of a visible form were not distinct from the
cognition of a tangible form and so on — whereas [on the contrary] the
cognitions of tangible and visual forms, being produced by different
senses, are to be admitted as [differentiated and therefore] not
[reducible to] one.70

Nor can a conceptual elaboration, which takes place at a later time,71
or memory, in which only the cognition of a tangible form is manifested
and which is [consequently deemed as] invariably associated with the
absence of the cognition of a visual form, also establish the absence of
the cognition of a visual form. For if at that time a visual form had
also been there, then, just as [now] in this [memory] the cognition of a
tangible form is manifested, in the same way also the cognition of a
visual form should be manifested in it.72 In fact, although [memory], in
the manner [outlined above], is aware of itself — referring to that time
— as containing the manifestation of the mere cognition of a tangible
form, it does not [contextually] establish a discrimination (i.e. the
absence) of the manifestation of a cognition of a visual form.
Therefore, although it may [be admitted to] exclude in itself the
manifestation of a cognition of a visual form as being opposed to the
form being currently cognized, none the less how could it (i.e. memory)
know that previously, i.e. at the time when only the cognition of a
tangible form was manifested, there was no cognition of a visual form?
For on the basis of the already stated reason, there is no invariable
concomitance of the cognition of a mere tangible form, which is taking
place there, with the absence of a distinct and separate cognition of a
visual form. In fact, that [particular kind of] cognition that is memory
(smārtaṁ vijñānam) derives from the impressions left by a previous
perception [and] performs the task of determining [its object] only by
conforming to the previous perception, [that is,] not by autonomously
(svātantryeṇa)73 having access to the particular perception that
occurred in the past, so that, while excluding in itself the cognition
of a visual form in the past74 as being opposed to the form currently
being manifested, it might also exclude its object [equally] belonging
to the past.75 In the same vein, some [opponents] maintain that by
excluding the manifestation in itself of the place with a jar the
cognition of a mere [empty] place also externally excludes a jar. For
the above-mentioned reason, just as two [distinct] former perceptions
each shining by its own light were not associated into a single light,
in the same way a discursive cognition (vikalpajñāna)76 — which derives
from the impressions left by a former cognition and [consequently]
conforms to it — is reflectively aware (parāmr̥śati) of them in terms of
“[This has been] perceived” and “I am perceiving”.77

Therefore, although we have a reflective awarenesses of both
[cognitions], [none the less we do have] the determination only of those
two cognitions — that of a tangible form and that of the visible form —
taken in themselves (-mātra-), each being self-illuminating, but not the
determination of their occurring at the same time (na tv
ekakālikatvena), by virtue of which it (i.e. the memory/discursive
cognition) — being reflectively aware only of the cognition of the
tangible form which occurred at the time of darkness, free from any
cognition of a visual form occurring at the same time and resting in its
own self-manifestation (svābhāsopārūḍha) — might [be able to] negate the
cognition of a visual form at the time of that darkness.78

On the contrary, [perceptual] cognitions, being unable to illuminate
each other and each being grounded in itself only, cannot by themselves
establish their occurrence at the same time. Similarly, the discursive
cognition, too (vikalpenāpi), which originates from the impressions left
by them and has a reflective awareness of several [distinct] cognitions
each illuminating its own form alone, cannot establish their occurrence
at the same time, for it is not in the nature of [discursive cognition]
to be an awareness directly touching a distinct real entity which has
formerly been perceived. Nor, on the other hand, has it ever been said
that the discursive cognitions are admitted to directly touch (i.e. have
direct access to) the real entity formerly perceived. On these premises,
cognitions, even the perceptual ones (aindriyakāṇām api),79 could not be
manifested as mutually associated or separated, unless they rest on
having as their essential nature the consciousness-principle in the form
of a single and unitary introverted self-awareness. Consequently, one
could not determine for things, too, a restriction of their being
[mutually] present or absent, whence the destruction of the world of
practical experience would ensue. Therefore, we are obliged to admit for
cognitions [some] unification which has the form of their resting on a
single consciousness-principle. This [is what is meant by the Vr̥tti]
with the phrase “of all cognitions of things”. The
consciousness-principle is that very unification (anusandhāna) of the
many cognitions: in this way, also the word “one” in the Kārikā (cf.
ekacidvapuḥ) has been explained.

Also the unification of many perceptual cognitions in memory, etc. is
nothing but their resting on the single consciousness-principle; it is
for this very reason that “consciousness-principle” and “unification”
are put here [in the Vr̥tti] in a relationship of non-difference. And
thus, on the basis of the reasoning that will be stated below, to this
consciousness-principle, full of all things, there belongs a power, in
terms of non-differentiation [from it], named “knowledge”, consisting in
the manifestation (-avabhāsanā)80 of the various multiform things. In
fact, when something which is in itself a [unitary] substance
(padārthātmaiva) is superimposed with a differentiation deriving from
its different effects, we call it “power”.81 And by the word “Great
Lord” (maheśvara iti) the sūtra indicates him whose “power” yields fruit
due to his will alone, i.e. without the intermediation of the capacity
of other causes. And the fact that the consciousness-principle is to be
one and unitary in its nature will be explained later on.82 Memory, for
its part, is the power to make an entity, which has been manifested in
the past, known in the present as formerly manifested. We have the power
of exclusion (apohana-śakti) when a cognition in the form of conceptual
elaboration is generated exclusively by the latent impression left by a
particular manifestation, [a latent impression which is] awakened by the
wonderful (vicitra)83 will [of the Lord] as devoid of any specific
spatio-temporal delimitation. For these (i.e. “this kind of”) conceptual
elaborations have as their [specific] function that of rejecting
envisaged contrary options (śaṅkita- pratipakṣa).84 Also in respect to
an object being manifested without commingling with other realities
[and] having a well-defined nature of its own85 — but at same time being
capable of having a variety of possible causal efficiencies — the
knowing subjects aspiring to only one of these causal efficiencies — a
specific one — will not succeed in making use of such an object in the
various occurrences of practical life, unless we reject the various
contrary options, endowed with various causal efficiencies, which they
are figuring out.86 For the object, which is not separated from the
level of īśvara, as it were, has as its essence that of all other
objects.87 The above is the very essential nature of these88 realities
as they are characterized by mutual differentiation.89

Therefore, it is precisely this power of exclusion, whose sphere of
activity is represented by conceptual elaboration, that opens the way to
the transactions of practical life.90 On account of this, [the power of
exclusion] has been mentioned separately in the Songs by the Blessed
One, who possesses the status of the Great Lord. In fact, He said: “From
me memory [. . .]”.91 [All] these [powers derive] from a differentiation
of the power of Knowledge.

* Originally published in K. Preisendanz (ed.), Expanding and Merging
Horizons: Contributions to South Asian and Cross-Cultural Studies in
Commemoration of Wilhelm Halbfass, Vienna 2007, pp. 473-90.

* * I wish to thank Prof. Karin Preisendanz for her useful comments and
keen editorial care.

References

Texts

BhG = Bhagavad-Gītā, in BhGŚ.

BhGAS = Bhagavad-Gītārtha-Saṁgraha of Abhinavagupta, in
Śrīmadbhagavad-Gītā with Gītārtha-Saṁgraha, part I: Text, ed. S.
Sankaranarayanan, Oriental Research Institute, Tirupati, 1985.

Bhagavad-Gītā-Bhāṣya, in Śrīmadbhagavad-Gītā with the Commentaries
Śrimat-Śāṅkarabhāṣya (with Ānandagiri’s Vyākhyā), Nīlakaṇṭhī,
Bhāṣyotkarṣa-Dīpikā of Dhanapati, Śrīdharī, Gītārtha-Saṁgraha of
Abhinavaguptācārya, Gūḍhārtha-Dīpikā of Madhusūdana (with
Gūḍhārtha-Tattvāloka of Śrīdharmadattaśarma), ed. L.S. Panshikar, 2nd
edn., Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi, 1978.

BhGS = Sarvatobhadra, in The Bhagavad-Gītā with the Commentary Called
Sarvatobhadra of Rāmakaṇṭha, KSTS 64, ed. M.K. Shastri, Bombay 1943.

DhP = Dharmottara-pradīpa of Durveka Miśra, in Dharmottara-Pradīpa
[Being a Sub-commentary on Dharmottara’s Nyāyabindu-Ṭīkā, a Commentary
on Dharmakīrti’s Nyāyabindu], ed. Pandita Dalsukhbhai Malvania, rev. 2nd
edn., Patna 1971.

HB = Dharmakīrti, Hetubindu, ed. in Steinkellner 1967.

ĪPK = Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Kārikā and -Vr̥tti of Utpaladeva, ed. and tr. in
Torella 2002.

ĪPV = Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vimarśinī of Abhinavagupta, ed. Mukund Ram
Shastri, 2 vols., KSTS 22 and 33, Bombay 1918-21.

ĪPVV = Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vivr̥ti-Vimarśinī of Abhinavagupta, ed.
Madhusudan Kaul Shastri, 3 vols., KSTS 60, 62 and 65, Bombay 1938-43.

NB-Ṭ = Nyāyabindu-Ṭīkā of Dharmottara in DhP.

P = Pāṇini’s Aṣṭādhyāyī, ed. in Sharma 1995.

PV = Pramāṇa-Vārttika of Dharmakīrti, in Pramāṇa-Vārttika with the
Commentary “Vr̥tti” of Acharya Manorathanandin, critically ed. Swami
Dwarikadas Shastri, Varanasi, 1968.

PVSV = Dharmakīrti’s Svavr̥tti on Pramāṇa-Vārttika I, ed. in Gnoli 1960.

VP = Vākyapadīya of Bhartr̥hari, in Vākyapadīya with the
Prakīrṇakaprakāśa of Helārāja: Kāṇḍa 3, ed. K.A.S. Iyer, 2 vols., Poona,
1963-73.

Vākyapadīya, ed. in W. Rau, Bhartr̥haris Vākyapadīya: Die Mūlakārikās
nach den Handschriften, Abhandlungen für die Kunde des Morgenlandes 42,
Wiesbaden, 1977.

VBh = Vijñāna-Bhairava-Tantra with the Commentary partly by Kṣemarāja
and partly by Śivopādhyāya, ed. Mukunda Ram Shastri, Kashi Sanskrit Text
Series 8, Bombay 1918.

Studies and translations

Bühnemann, G., 1980, “Identifizierung von Sanskrittexten
Śaṅkaranandanas”, Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens, 24:
191-98.

Gnoli, R., 1960, Pramāṇavārttikam: Chapter One with the Autocommentary
(Serie Orientale Roma 23), Roma, 1960.

Iwata, T., 1993, Prasaṅga und Prasaṅgaviparyaya bei Dharmakīrti und
seinen Kommentatoren (Wiener Studien zur Tibetologie und Buddhismuskunde
31), Wien.

Krasser, H., 2001, “On the Date and Works of Śaṅkaranandana”, in R.
Torella (ed.) Le Parole e i Marmi: Studi in Onore di Raniero Gnoli nel
suo 70° compleanno (Serie Orientale Roma 92), pp. 489-508.

Pandey, K.C., 1963, Abhinavagupta: An Historical and Philosophical
Study, 2nd edn., Varanasi.

Sharma, R.N. (ed. and tr.), 1995, The Aṣṭādhyāyī of Pāṇini, vol. 3,
Delhi.

Steinkellner, E., 1967, Dharmakīrti’s Hetubindu: Teil I: Tibetischer
Text und rekonstruierter Sanskrit-Text; Teil II: Übersetzung und
Anmerkungen, Wien.

Steinkellner, E. and M.T. Much, 1995, Texte der erkenntnistheoretischen
Schule des Buddhismus (Systematische Übersicht über die buddhistische
Sanskrit-Literatur 2), Göttingen. (Abhandlungen der Akademie der
Wissenschaften in Göttingen, Philologisch- Historische Klasse, Folge
3/214).

Torella, R., 1988, “A Fragment of Utpaladeva’s
Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vivr̥ti”, East and West, 38: 137-74.

———, 2002, The Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Kārikā of Utpaladeva with the Author’s
Vr̥tti: Critical Edition and Annotated Translation, Motilal Banarsidass,
Delhi (I edn. Serie Orientale Roma 71, IsMEO, Roma, 1994), repr. 2014.

———, 2011, The Philosophical Traditions of India: An Appraisal,
Varanasi: Indica Books.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 Cf. Torella 2002: xl-xliv.

2 “Leaf 33. Size 7⅟2 x 9⅟2”. Lines per page 19 approximately. Syll. per
line 21. Handwriting almost recent. Written on local paper which does
not seem to be old. Thirty-first leaf worm eaten, it is clear from the
notebook pages 44-46. The ms begins line no. 1, top: śrīgaṇeśāya namaḥ;
line 2: saṁskāre saty api, etc. Ends abruptly as can be seen at page 49.
Character Śāradā”. This description perfectly suits the National
Archives manuscript, except for the mention of the worm-eaten
thirty-first leaf, which, at least as far as I can see from a rather
faint xerox-copy, would seem more or less intact. According to Prakash
Pandey (personal communication), the manuscript belongs to the latter
half of the eighteenth century.

3 The technique of prasaṅga-viparyaya is also well known to Buddhists
(cf. Iwata 1993).

4 The ĪPVV seems to be the only work to quote from the Apohasiddhi;
among the five quotations (pp. 272, l. 14; 292, ll. 19, 21, 23; 293, l.
12) the second one is certainly in prose, thus showing that the
Apohasiddhi, just like other works by Śaṅkaranandana, consisted of
kārikās mixed with prose passages. Only three out of the five quotations
could be traced either in its single extant Sanskrit manuscript
(Bühnemann 1980: 193-94) or in the Tibetan translation (see Gnoli 1960:
xxiii-xxiv); on Śaṅkaranandana, see Steinkellner and Much 1995 and
Krasser 2001. (For a new interpretation of Śaṅkarānandana’s religious
affiliation see Torella 2011: 19 n.12) In a separate study under
preparation I propose to examine the context of the Apohasiddhi from
which the above passages have been drawn. I cordially thank Ernst
Steinkellner and Helmut Krasser for very kindly and generously putting
at my disposal all the available material on Śaṅkaranandana’s
Apohasiddhi, including a copy of the only available Sanskrit manuscript
(produced from Rahula Sankrityayana’s negatives) and a transcript of the
Tibetan translation.

5 The words underlined in the text are those literally cited in the
ĪPVV. Punctuation is mine (that found in the ms is often misleading).
The sandhi has been “normalized”.

6 Ms yujyate. I follow Abhinavagupta’s reading (ĪPVV I: 273, ll. 6-7):
tad etat tātparyam avataraṇikāyām āha “yujyeta” iti ।

7 At this point the ĪPVV seems to refer to other parts of the Vivr̥ti
which are not found in the ms (ĪPVV I: 273, ll. 15-16: śaktiyogalakṣaṇaṁ
ceti).

8 prakāśarūpaṁ, my emendation (ms viśvarūpaṁ), following Abhinavagupta’s
reading (cited and commented upon in ĪPVV I: 273, ll. 18-21) which seems
more appropriate to the context.

9 -sya bhāva-, my emendation (ms svabhāva-); cf. ĪPVV I: 273, l. 25.

10 upapādayiṣyate, my emendation (ms pratipādayiṣyatāṁ); cf. ĪPVV I:
274, ll. 17-18: upapādayiṣyata iti prakāśātmā prakāśyo ’rtha
ityādisthāneṣu.

11 tathāpi, my emendation (ms tathā hi); I follow the reading cited and
commented upon in ĪPVV I: 275, ll. 5-6 (s. n. 47 to the translation).

12 avakalpita-, my emendation (ms -vikalpita-). Cf. ĪPVV I: 275, ll.
7-8: bhedas tenāvakalpito ’vajñayāprarohayogena kalpitaḥ.

13 saghaṭa-, my emendation (ms ghaṭa-).

14 ĪPVV I: 277, l. 17 seems to have one more quotation from the Vivr̥ti
(ghaṭam api) which is not found in the ms.

15 Ms jñātam atas is to be corrected to jñātaṁ yatas. This was probably
the reading of the exemplar, as we can surmise from the anusvāra above
-ta- (subsequently deleted); the following ya- must have been misread as
ma-, thus suggesting the deletion of the anusvāra.

16 I correct ms tat to tan na, as meaning strictly requires.

17 aghaṭapradeśajñāne, my emendation (ms tatsaghaṭapradeśajñānaṁ). This
seems to be the reading required by the context. This would also tally
with Abhinavagupta’s remark (ĪPVV I: 278, ll. 2-3): nanv
aghaṭapradeśajñānaṁ prakāśata ity atredam eva tattvaṁ
saghaṭapradeśajñānaṁ na prakāśata iti.

18 aghaṭa-, my emendation (ms ghaṭa-), supported by Abhinavagupta’s
quotation and comments (ĪPVV I: 278, ll. 3-5: naitad ity āha “aghaṭa”
iti paryudāsavr̥ttyā hy atra vastvantaraprakāśo bhāti, na tu
prasajyapratiṣedhātmā saghaṭapradeśajñānaprakāśābhavaḥ).

19 na na, my emendation (ms na).

20 tasyāghaṭa-, my emendation (ms tasya ghaṭa-), supported by
Abhinavagupta’s paraphrase (ĪPVV I: 278, ll. 13-14):
kevalapradeśapratyayasyobhayathāpy upapatteḥ.

21 -anavyabhicārāt, my emendation. This (or also -vyabhicārāt) is in
fact the reading one would expect, instead of ms -avyabhicārāt
(ekatarāvyabhicārāt); see also Abhinavagupta’s comments ĪPVV I: 278, l.
13: avyabhicāro ’vinābhāvo nāsti.

22 The original reading of the ms was sambandhakāre, then transformed
into samandhakāre, which is in fact the correct reading (cf. ĪPVV I:
280, l. 23: santate ’ndhakāre).

23 yujyeta, my emendation (ms yujyate).

24 In the ms -vikalpa- has been later corrected to the correct
-vikalpaḥ.

25 -avyabhicāriṇī, my emendation (ms -vyabhicāriṇī); cf. ĪPVV I: 281,
ll. 18-19: [. . .] rūpajñānasyābhāvam avyabhicāreṇa bhavantaṁ sādhayet.

26 yato, absent in the ms but cited by Abhinavagupta, apparently has to
be added here. The following phrases up to sādhayatīti are taken by him
as a quotation (from an unknown source). Cf. ĪPVV I: 281, ll. 20-21:
tatra hetutvaṁ granthāntarasyāha “yataḥ” iti.

27 caiva, my emendation (the ms has cai-, corrected to nai- above the
line).

28 -abhāvāt, my emendation (ms -bhāvāt). Utpaladeva is here stating the
Śaiva position on the matter which in fact excludes any correlation
between the two cognitions.

29 The expected meaning (with the further support of Abhinavagupta’s
comments in ĪPVV I: 282, ll. 10- 15) has induced me to modify at some
places the transmitted text which is evidently corrupt. In fact, the ms
reads: ābhāsamānākāraviparītaṁ paricchindan pūrvasmin kāle viṣayam api
rūpajñānaṁ pūrvabhāvi vyavacchindyāt. In particular, Abhinavagupta’s
tādātmyena asahamānā (ibid.: l. 12) can by no means refer to the
transmitted paricchindan.

30 saghaṭa-, my emendation (ms ghaṭa-).

31 The ms has an anusvāra deleted above -ta-.

32 -vyavasthānaṁ syāt, my emendation (ms -vyavasthā na syān).

33 By reading -prakāśakānekajñāna-, I restore what seems to have been
the original reading of ms, which was corrected to -prakāśakāle jñāna-
(by changing -ne- to -le- and deleting -ka- by means of a horizontal
stroke).

34 smr̥tyādau, my emendation (ms smr̥tyātmā); cf. ĪPVV I: 285, l. 6.

35 The ms has nirbharasya, corrected to nirbhara-. The correct reading
is the original nirbharasya (cf. the paraphrase ĪPVV I: 285, ll. 21-25:
uktābhir yuktibhir ekasya [. . .] ityādivakṣyamāṇābhiḥ
samastabhāvapūrṇasya jñānaṁ nāma śaktiḥ).

36 phalabhedāropitabhedo, my emendation (ms phalabhedāropitadbhedo). The
passage is also quoted, with a slightly different, equally possible
reading in Kṣemarāja’s commentary on the Vijñāna-Bhairava-Tantra (VBh)
(p. 14, ll. 3-5): uktaṁ ca pratyabhijñāyāṁ “phalabhedād āropitabhedaḥ
padārthātmā śaktiḥ”.

37 The ms has pratiphalati, apparently corrected to phalati; the latter
reading, which I have accepted, is also confirmed by ĪPVV I: 289, ll.
6-7: “phalati” phalaparyantā saṁpadyate, na punaḥ pratihanyate yasya.

38 The following definitions of smr̥ti and apohana are incorporated in a
marginal note found in one of the mss of Abhinavagupta’s ĪPV used for
the Kashmir Series edition (Delhi National Archives, Sanskrit ms No. 5,
p. 131, right margin): deśakālaviśeṣā- vacchedaśūnyatvena
vicitrecchāprabodhitāvabhāsabhedavāsanā-
mātropapāditavikalparūpavijñānāpohanaśaktiḥ । pūrvā-vabhāsitavastunaḥ
pūrvāvabhāsitatvena vartamānakāle prakhyā-panaśaktiḥ smr̥tiśaktir ity
anayor bhedaḥ. Note 71 of the ĪPV edition (vol. I, p. 117) is based on
this marginal annotation.

39 The text as quoted in the ĪPV manuscript (see above n 38) has
-prabodhitā-.

40 avabhāte, my emendation (ms avabhāti). The latter reading would not
in itself be impossible; Abhinavagupta’s paraphrase and comments,
however, consistently have avabhāte).

41 If we rely upon ĪPVV I: 295, l. 25 (atrāha “māyīyānām” iti), we
should add māyīyānām (omitted in the ms) after eteṣām. However, this
would involve a slight redundancy, which is not usual in Utpaladeva’s
style. I prefer to surmise that eteṣām was omitted in the edited text of
ĪPVV, leaving merely māyīyānām which glossed it.

42 According to Abhinavagupta, here the meaning of the optative conforms
to Pāṇini’s Aṣṭādhyāyī (P) III.3.156: hetuhetumator liṅ, “Affix LIṄ
optionally occurs after a verbal root when hetu ‘cause’ and hetumat
‘effect’ are denotated” (tr. Sharma 1995: 574). The fact that cognitions
share the same essential nature is precisely what renders vyavahāra
possible.

43 Cf. ĪPVV I: 273, l. 12: “ātmā” iti svabhāvaḥ.

44 This means that they rest on the Lord, and are neither independent of
Him nor exceeding His own form (ĪPVV I: 273, ll. 14-15).

45 See below n 91.

46 See, e.g. ĪPK 1.5.3.

47 That is, a cognition in which the colour white does not appear.

48 For Abhinavagupta (ĪPVV I: 274, l. 25) this is a case of
daṇḍāpūpīyanyāya, “the maxim of the stick and cakes”. A stick and cakes
are usually tied together so that if something happens to the stick
(e.g. being eaten by rats) the same happens to the cakes.

49 Despite any “superficial” differentiation deriving from their
contents, cognitions too must have (at least) the same status of
ultimate non-differentiation from consciousness as their objects (ĪPVV
I: 275, ll. 5-7: “tathāpi” iti tenāpy ahamaṁśāvyatirekeṇa vartamānānām
ity arthaḥ).

50 The preverb ava- is given a derogatory meaning (avajñayā) by
Abhinavagupta: the objects are only able to shed an imperfect, i.e. not
fully developed (aprarohayogena), appearance of differentiation onto
their cognition (cf. n 12 to the text).

51 eva means here “restriction”. As the Vivr̥ti sets out to show, this
resting of the various cognitions on one unitary consciousness principle
is the necessary condition for the worldly transactions to take place
successfully (ĪPVV I: 275, ll. 14-17).

52 In this context, eka (qualifying cit, jñāna, etc.) always oscillates
between “one, single” and “unitary”, usually expressing both meanings at
the same time.

53 The Buddhist position Utpaladeva is referring to is clearly
formulated in Dharmottara’s Nyāyabindu-Ṭīkā (NBṬ): 101, ll. 13-14:

yadaikajñānasaṁsargivastvantaropalambhaḥ । ekendriya-jñānagrāhyaṁ
locanādipraṇidhānābhimukhaṁ vastudvayam anyonyāpekṣam ekajñānasaṁsargi
kathyate ।।

54 Utpaladeva’s criticism is addressed to the Buddhists, who, just like
the Śaivas, uphold the self-awareness of cognitions but, unlike the
Śaivas, reject a common ground for them, represented by the unitary
conscious subject. Interestingly, in order to present an exemplary
statement on the self-awareness of cognition, Abhinavagupta resorts to
Bhartr̥hari’s Vākyapadīya, by citing a well-known verse from the
Jātisamuddeśa (VP III.1.104):

yathā jyotiḥ prakāśena nānyenābhiprakāśyate ।

jñānarūpaṁ tathā jñāne nānyatrābhiprakāśyate ।।

(Incidentally, it is to be noted that pādas c and d differ considerably
from the text in Rau’s and Iyer’s editions, which both read: jñānākāras
tathānyena na jñānenopagr̥hyate.) The weakness of the Buddhist position
on the matter appears quite clearly in their treatment of the crucial
problem of anupalabdhi (non-perception) and abhāva (non-being, absence),
which therefore becomes the object of a sustained analysis in the
subsequent portion of the Vivr̥ti (ĪPVV I: 276, l. 24 to 277, l. 1:
anyavyavacchedair grahaṇavyavahāro ’pi svaparaviṣayo ya ucyate, so ’pi
na nirvahed ityāśayena saugatīyam abhāvasiddhiprakāram eva vicārayati).

55 Cf. Hetubindu (HB), p. 22*, ll. 2-4 (Steinkellner 1967: Teil I, p.
73): yatra yasminn upalabhyamāne niyamena yasyopalabdhir bhavati
yogyatāyā aviśeṣāt, sa tatsaṁsr̥ṣṭaḥ, ekajñānasaṁsargāt. See also the
sentences immediately following the NBṬ passage quoted above (n 50):
tayor hi sator naikaniyatā bhavati pratipattiḥ । yogyatāyā dvayor apy
aviśiṣṭatvāt (NBṬ, pp. 101, l. 14 to 102, l. 1).

56 As to the meaning of dvitīya (lit. “second”), see below n 58.

57 Cf. ĪPVV I: 277, ll. 18-19: saghaṭapradeśajñānaṁ tad bhavet, na tv
etadviparītāghaṭapradeśajñānam.

58 ĪPVV I: 277, l. 19: “dvitīyaṁ tv” iti vyatiriktam. In other words,
the perception of an empty surface cannot evoke the possible perception
of a surface with a jar, to be subsequently negated. This is apparently
what Abhinavagupta means to say with the laconic remark (ibid., lines
ll. 19-21): na hy aghaṭapradeśajñānena jñānāntarasya bhāvo jñāyate, yena
tadabhāvo ’pi jñāyeta.

59 Ibid.: 277, ll. 24-25: iti ca vaktuṁ na yujyata iti saṁbandhaḥ.

60 According to the Buddhists, we do not need a separate cognition to
account for the cognition of the absence of a non-jar when a jar is
cognized: it is the self-awareness of the cognition “jar” which
implicitly also cognizes the negation of its contrary. The jar itself
has as its own form the not being a non-jar.

61 That is, of the cognition of the place without the jar, i.e. an empty
space.

62 In other words, the negation of the cognition of an empty space in
the Buddhist argument is not to be taken in terms of prasajyapratiṣedha
but of paryudāsa: it does not confine itself to negating a thing but
affirms the presence of another (see n 18 to the text).

63 That is, of the space taken in itself, independently of the jar’s
being or not being there; cf. Abhinavagupta’s paraphrase (ĪPVV I: 278,
ll. 13-14): kevalapradeśapratyayasyobhayathāpy upapatteḥ.

64 Abhinavagupta develops the Buddhist’s arguments outlined by
Utpaladeva and casts them into full-fledged inferences based on various
forms of anupalabdhi (cf. ĪPVV I: 278, ll. 14ff.).

65 Cf. ĪPVV I: 278 l. 22 to 279 l. 1: kiṁ ca kevalapradeśo ghaṭo
vānantarūpaparamāṇumayaḥ saṁnihitānantāvayavo vā । tatra yāvanti
dravyāṇi, tāvanti cet pr̥thag jñānāni; tarhi teṣāṁ pr̥thak pr̥thak
svaprakāśatvenaikasamūharūpaprakāśābhāvāt pradeśajñānam eva na bhavet,
bhāti ca tat pradeśajñānam iti.

66 That is, when one is perceiving an empty space.

67 From this point onwards it is no longer feasible to present the
larger structure of the argumentation by demarcating the Śaiva and the
Buddhist positions, because the latter comes to be too closely embedded
in the former.

68 The Buddhist explanation is seen as not conforming to common sense,
which explains the matter under discussion in a much simpler way (ĪPVV
I: 280, l. 8: “evam” iti svakalpanayā lokapratītyananugr̥hītayā).
Moreover, the Buddhist argument would lead to a regressus ad infinitum
(ibid.: iyān ity anavasthāpādako nyāyaḥ).

Dharmakīrti himself was well aware of the risk involved in not
accounting for anupalambha directly, i.e. by explaining it within the
inner dynamics of the self-awareness of a perceptive act: the absence of
an object would be arrived at by means of its non-perception, but the
absence of its perception would need another anupalambha to be
established, which would lead to a regressus ad infinitum.
Pramāṇa-Vārttika [PV] IV.274-75:

tasmād anupalambho ’yaṁ svayaṁ pratyakṣato* gataḥ ।

svamātravr̥tter gamakas tadabhāvavyavasthiteḥ ।।

anyathārthasya nāstitvaṁ gamyate ’nupalambhataḥ ।

upalambhasya nāstitvam anyenety anavasthitiḥ ।।).

*Manorathanandin reads svasaṁvedanāt.

Verses 270-75 are quoted by Abhinavagupta in ĪPVV I: 279 l. 24 to 280 l.
5. The same kind of objection is put by Dharmakīrti into the mouth of an
opponent in his Svavr̥tti on Pramāṇa-Vārttika I.3 (PVSV: 4, ll. 15-17:
atrānupalabdher liṅgād asattāyām upalabdher abhāvo ’py anyayānupalabdhyā
sādhya ity anavasthānād apratipattiḥ syāt). The Buddhist explanation
itself would become acceptable (instead of coming to a dead end) if it
were placed in a Śaiva perspective (ĪPVV I: 280, l. 13: yad bhavadbhir
uktam, tad upapadyate . . .). For the Śaivas, in fact, a single
introverted self-consciousness is the common ground which unifies all
cognitions (ibid. l. 10: asmaddr̥śā jñānānāṁ svasaṁvedanam antarmukham
ekam eveti).

69 Cf. ĪPVV I: 280, ll. 24-25: “etad api” ity aprātītikaṁ niṣphalaṁ ca
sad apīty apiśabdārthaḥ.

70 If two things (e.g. a jar and a cloth) are the object of the same
sense, they are cognized by the same cognitive act. But this is not the
case with a visual and a tangible form. In the negative case it ensues
that in the dark the absence of a tangible form cannot be understood as
the absence of a visual form, since there is no single cognition in
which both a visual and a tangible form are manifested. Cf. ĪPVV I: 281,
ll. 1-4: abhinnendriyajanyānāṁ hi ghaṭapaṭādīnām iva saṁnihitānām eṣa
niyamaḥ — ekajñānagrāhyateti । na ca rūpasparśau rūparasau vā
samānendriyagrāhyau, yena tadviṣayam ekam eva jñānaṁ rūpasparśābhāsaṁ
saṁbhāvyeta rūparasābhāsaṁ vā.

71 If I understand correctly, this remark is meant to exclude the
vikalpa which immediately follows direct perception and transforms it
into a determinate cognition.

72 This inference would have as its hetu “the non-perception of the
effect” (kāryānupalabdhi), whose validity is viewed by Abhinavagupta as
highly questionable already in itself, i.e. prior to his examination of
the relevant arguments.

73 Namely, through an illuminating power of its own (cf. ĪPVV I: 282, l.
9: svātantryeṇa svena prakāśabalena). What memory can do is only to
recall the illuminating power belonging to the original perception, or,
in other words, it conforms to it or “imitates” it (ibid.: ll. 15-16:
smr̥tir hi pūrvam anubhavam anukaroti); however, this perception being
“imitated”, Abhinavagupta goes on, is to be related to the object of
memory (ibid., l. 16: paraṁ smartavyasaṁbandhinam).

74 That is, a cognition which had been hypothesized and then negated in
the past.

75 This crucial passage has been carefully examined and explained by
Abhinavagupta (ĪPVV I: 282, ll. 10-15). Memory, while cognizing the
previous cognition of a tangible form, contextually realizes that in the
range of its own cognitive act the cognition of a certain visual form,
opposed to that of the tangible form, would not be admissible. In this
way, memory would be allowed to establish now the previous absence of
the cognition of a visual form (and, through it, also the previous
absence of that visual form) on the basis of the fact that if the
cognition of a visual form had taken place it would have entered the
range of the memory cognition along with the cognition of the tangible
form. This argument, however, is based on a presupposition that is
altogether unacceptable to the Śaivas for whom a cognition cannot
possibly become the object of another cognition. In the case at issue,
the former cognition cannot become the “object” (viṣaya) of memory
(ibid.: ll. 7-8: na tu viṣayatvenābhāsayati jñānānāṁ parasaṁvedyatvasya
vistarato nirākr̥tatvāt).

76 According to Abhinavagupta, this is a general designation also
including memory (ĪPVV I: 282, ll. 24-25: “vikalpajñānam” iti
sāmānyoktiḥ smr̥tim api saṁgr̥hṇīte). Abhinavagupta (ibid.: 283, ll. 1-4)
also records a different interpretation by “others” who take vikalpa as
a particular form of memory, the only difference being that memory
proper refers to a perception which occurred in the past and is now
extinct (apart from the impressions left by it).

77 That is, memory and discursive cognition respectively.

78 Cf. the construction of the sentence by Abhinavagupta (ĪPVV I: 283,
ll. 15-16): rūpajñānaviviktasvābhāsopārūḍhasparśajñānaparāmarśi-
vikalpajñānam iti sambandhaḥ.

79 Utpaladeva is addressing again the Buddhist opponent: no single
cognition, particularly not even the perceptual cognition, can establish
the absence of something by itself alone. As a consequence, either the
perception has to enter by itself into a net of relations to other
cognitions (which goes against the Buddhist presuppositions) or the
Buddhist has to admit that absence can only be established by means of
inference (which the Buddhist intended to reserve for the establishment
of the abhāvavyavahāra alone). But also the establishment of the
abhāvavyavahāra by means of inference would entail a regressus ad
infinitum (cf. ĪPVV I: 284, l. 25 to 285, l. 1: pradeśakaivalyavyavahāro
’py ānumānikatvād anavasthopahata iti).

80 The “causing things to appear [as ‘this’]” concerns the limited
subject (ĪPVV I: 286, l. 3: idam ity avabhāsamānā [read: avabhāsanā]
paśupramātr̥vartinī). The samarthācaraṇa component that Abhinavagupta
singles out in the causative form (“to make somebody/something able to .
. .”) is referred to the freedom of the Lord. The manifestation of the
object as external to consciousness (“this”) does not entail a real
separation from the absolute light of consciousness (ibid., ll. 10-11:
na mahāprakāśāt pr̥thakkaroti), since it presupposes the contextual
“creation” of a māyic subject, from whose limited light alone the object
appears as separate.

81 According to Abhinavagupta (cf. ĪPVV I: 287, ll. 3-9), a single thing
or being, capable of producing various effects, does not lend itself to
be indicated, or taught successfully, through a single word or concept.
Practical reality and linguistic communication (vyavahāra) require the
unitary thing to be expressed in manifold ways on the basis of its
various efficiencies: one and the same fire can be indicated as
“burner”, “cooker” or “illuminator”. When the manifoldness of aspects is
borne in mind, we speak of “power(s)”; when unity is borne in mind, we
speak of “possessor of powers”. However, none of these two approaches,
Abhinavagupta continues, can be claimed to be ultimately true, because
both of them are a creation of the Supreme Lord (ibid.: ll. 8-9:
parameśvareṇaiva tathā sr̥ṣṭatvāt). In their conception of śakti
Utpaladeva and Abhinavagupta are reminiscent of what Bhartr̥hari says
about the many śaktis that any substance possesses, being the basis of
the grammatical notion of sādhana; see particularly VP III.7.2:

śaktimātrasamūhasya viśvasyānekadharmaṇaḥ ।

sarvadā sarvathā bhāvāt kvacit kiñcid vivakṣyate ।।

Cf. Helarāja’s commentary thereon (VP: 232, ll. 4-5): ghaṭādayo bhāvā
viśvaśabdavācyāḥ । te ca tattadudakāharaṇādikāryasādhikānāṁ śaktīnāṁ
samūharūpāḥ); see also kārikā 6.

82 According to Abhinavagupta, Utpaladeva here refers to ĪPK I.6.11.

83 What puzzles a hypothetical opponent in the “exclusion” process
(apohana) outlined here is the fact that the conceptual elaboration
arises only from the impression left by the former perception of the
object, and yet does not possess the same character of spatio-temporal
definiteness that belonged to its source (in fact, the conceptual
elaboration is in essence something general). The objection is made
explicit in ĪPVV I: 291, ll. 8-9: nanu deśādyavacchinne ’nubhūte tatkr̥tā
vāsanā kathaṁ tadanavacchinnaviṣayā [my correction; the edited text is
apparently corrupt: tatkr̥tayā vāsanā kathaṁ tadavacchinnaviṣayayā]
prabudhyate. According to Utpaladeva, this inexplicable fact is due to
the unfathomable (ibid.: vicitrāparyanuyojyā) will of the Lord.

84 According to Abhinavagupta (ĪPVV I: 291, ll. 13ff.), the peculiarity
of apohana-śakti with respect to the mere jñāna-śakti lies precisely in
this figuring out of possible alternatives and then excluding them. In
Dharmakīrti’s formulation of the apoha theory, the alternatives to be
rejected are in fact various erroneous superimpositions (adhyāropa).
However, Abhinavagupta replies (ibid.: 292, ll. 15-17), the object of
the superimposition is already a mental construct, which in turn had to
be established by way of the exclusion of other superimpositions, and so
on; this entails that the simple ascertainment of a patch of blue colour
could not be arrived at even in thousands of cosmic eras
(vikalpasamāropaparamparānavasthānād yugakoṭibhir api na nīlaniścayaḥ).
Next, Abhinavagupta takes into account the position of Śaṅkaranandana
(ibid., ll. 18ff.), who in the Apohasiddhi substitutes anyathā-prasaṅga
(the mere possibility that a thing be different from itself? Cf. ll.
24-25: tatrāpi viśiṣṭe ’rthe pratibhāte ko ’nyathāprasaṅgasyāvasara iti
vaktavyam) for Dharmakīrti’s adhyāropa as the cause of doubt (see above
n 3). Both samāropa and anyathā-prasaṅga, however, are seen by
Abhinavagupta as inevitably leading to a regressus ad infinitum.

85 The possibility that an object may be different from what it appears
to be usually depends on its being mixed with something else (e.g. milk
with water) or on its having the same features as something else.
Utpaladeva’s following explanation of the apoha process is intended to
cover all possible cases, including the one most difficult to account
for: the case of a distinctly characterized object which is not mixed
with anything else.

86 According to Abhinavagupta, this peculiar variation on the theme of
apoha, which, though not being at all incompatible with the Buddhists’
position, has, to the best of my knowledge, never been explicitly put
forth by them, is to be traced back to some ācāryapāda, presumably a
Śaiva teacher (Utpaladeva himself?); cf. ĪPVV I: 295, ll. 18-20: tad
uktam ācāryapādair eva yāvatyo ’rthakriyās tāvatsaṁkhyo ’tatkāriṇāṁ
gaṇaḥ । tāvantas tatsamāropās tanniṣedhāś ca tatsamāḥ, etc.

87 The unexpressed question that Utpaladeva is answering is highlighted
by Abhinavagupta (ĪPVV I: 294, ll. 6-7): How can a particular object be
a strictly individualized entity and at the same time the occasion for a
number of hypothetical alternatives?

88 That is, the objects existing on the level of māyā. To sum up, they
are primarily anyonyabhedamaya, and secondarily anyonyātma.

89 In conclusion, the process of apoha can be successfully explained
only in a Śaiva context. Particularly, it presupposes that both the
knowing subject and the object are ultimately identified with īśvara and
are viśvātmā — even at the level of māyā, although in a more virtual and
concealed form. In the Buddhist explanation the defect of anavasthā,
etc., is unescapable because vikalpana, samāropaṇa, etc. are separate
and incapable of relating to each other by their own capacity alone
(ĪPVV I: 296, l. 22: yena [referring to the Śaiva position]
pr̥thagvikalpanasamāropaṇānavasthādoṣāprasaṅgaḥ). This potential
“openness” of the object (and the subject) is at the root of the
subject’s “doubt” about it. Of this “openness”, i.e. of the
viśvātmā-nature of the object, the subject maintains some kind of
subliminal, inner awareness, even on the level of māyā. To sum up:
unlike the Buddhists who view the “doubt” (i.e. the first step in the
apoha process) as deriving from the object alone, the Śaivas have it
arise from the “greatness” of the subject as well (ibid.: 296, ll.
18-19: māyāpade ’pi ca tatprakāśasaṁskārasyeśvarasyānativr̥tter āśaṅkā
pramātr̥māhātmyād evottiṣṭhati). The solution of the problem of objective
and subjective disparateness involved in the Buddhist theory as proposed
by Dharmakīrti, who maintains that the objects, though being essentially
differentiated, can be ascertained by the subject as unified owing to
their production of a single effect, e.g. a single cognition (PVSV: 60,
ll. 16-17: bhāvāḥ prakr̥tibhedino ’pi jñānādikam ekaṁ kāryaṁ kecit
kurvanti nānya iti), does not seem satisfactory to Abhinavagupta. In
fact, after quoting PV I.119 he refers to his subsequent indication of
its shortcomings (ĪPVV I: 297, l. 1: tatra sphuritam api vastu
duḥsamartham ity agre [to be added: sphuṭaṁ] bhaviṣyati).

90 It is precisely for this reason, Abhinavagupta says (ĪPVV I: 297, ll.
2-8), that the power of exclusion has been given a separate status,
though exclusion is the very body of conceptual cognition and of the
special case of conceptual cognition which is memory.

91 Bhagavad-Gītā (BhG) XV.15b: “From me derive memory, knowledge and
exclusion.” This passage sounds somewhat cryptic. For Śaṅkara
(Gītābhāṣya [BhGŚ]: 627, l. 4), apohana stands for “turning away from,
departing from” (apāyanam apagamanam), i.e. the loss of knowledge and
memory due to evil karma (the objects of apohana are jñāna and smr̥ti:
tadapohanam). According to Ānandagiri’s Vyākhyā thereon (p. 626, ll.
14-15), “knowledge” is the supernatural power to perceive what is beyond
the normal reach of the senses; “memory” is the capacity to recollect
what has been experienced in past lives. The commentary of Rājānaka
Rāmakaṇṭha (possibly identical with Utpaladeva’s disciple) is the one
that seems closer to the interpretation given by Utpaladeva. According
to Rāmakaṇṭha (Sarvatobhadra [BhGS]: 330, ll. 3ff.), memory, perceptual
cognition and exclusion are the outcome of the outflowing of Power
(śaktiprasara) in human beings. This Power, or more precisely this
Consciousness-Power (saṁvedana-śakti) acts in two ways, in that it
defines the being and the non-being of the various realities
(tattatpadārthabhāvābhāvaparicchedakatva). While the “non-being” of
realities is defined by means of apohana alone, their “being” is defined
by means of perceptual cognition (which makes something which was not
there before manifest) and by means of memory (which brings something
that has already been perceived in the past again to the mind). In both
processes apohana acts as prakāśanābhāva (absence of manifestation).
Though these powers act in limited subjects, they ultimately flow from
the one and absolutely real knowing subject (paramārthasaṁveditur
ekasmāt). According to Abhinavagupta’s Bhagavad-Gītārtha-Saṁgraha (BhGA)
(p. 231, ll. 10-16), jñāna is the manifestation of something new and
corresponds to the “great” creation (mahāsr̥ṣṭi) of the universe;
apohana, which represents the creation of the limited soul, is a
conceptual thought, which acts by fragmenting all-inclusive reality;
smr̥ti has the function to make manifest again what, subsequent to the
original cognition, has been reduced to the status of a latent
impression.

Appendix II*

Studies on Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vivr̥ti

Part II: What Is Memory?1

Raffaele Torella

The present paper is the second of a series of papers in which I have
been presenting the critical edition and English translation of the
fragmentary codex unicus of the Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vivr̥ti, the long
commentary that Utpaladeva composed on his own Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Kārikā
(ĪPK) and Svavr̥tti, a work of outstanding importance for the philosophy
of Kashmirian Śaivādvaita, and for Indian philosophy as a whole. I need
not repeat here what I have already said elsewhere on the nature of the
Vivr̥ti and its relation to the other commentaries.2 Suffice it to recall
that Utpaladeva is said to have composed the ĪPK and the concise Vr̥tti
at the same time, and later on to have devoted an analytic commentary to
the complex Kārikā-Vr̥tti, i.e. our Vivr̥ti (or Ṭīkā), in which he
discussed possible alternative views and rejected them, also making
occasionally quite long digressions on particular subjects. Of this
lengthy work) corresponding to the extent of 8,000 ślokas (hence the
traditional denomination of Aṣṭasāhasrī) — only a comparatively small
fragment has come down to us, covering the section ĪPK 1.3.6 through
1.5.3. A detailed exposition of my discovery of the original manuscript
— after a cursory consultation, some fifteen years ago, of a transcript
of the same made by K.C. Pandey can be found in the first study that I
have devoted to this text (Torella forthcoming), which also contains a
description of the manuscript (National Archives, Delhi, Skt. Mss no.
30).

The present paper deals with the Vivr̥ti on ĪPK 1.4.1-2. In the previous
chapter Utpaladeva, referring to an enigmatic statement in the
Bhagavad-Gītā (BhG),3 had identified three powers (śakti) in the Lord:
Cognition, Memory and Exclusion. After making some preliminary remarks
concerning them as a whole, he starts now a detailed inquiry into each
of them. His aim is to show that cognition, memory and exclusion, which
constitute the very basis of the knowledge process in human mind, are
indirectly also a proof of the coinciding of the individual subject with
universal Consciousness. None of these phenomena can be really explained
and their complex functioning accounted for satisfactorily in merely
“mechanic” terms, as first of all the Buddhists do. The individual
subject can cognize, remember and exclude only if it is conceived of as
inscribed within an eternal and, at the same time, dynamic universal
I-ness, i.e. Śiva.

If Utpaladeva’s investigation starts with memory, by infringing the
above-stated order, it is “because in a very clear manner (suspaṣṭam)
memory can serve as a logical reason for the establishment of the
identity of the self with the Lord”.4 The starting point is the
classical definition of memory given in Yoga-Sūtra (YS) I.11: “Memory is
the non-extinction of the object formerly perceived”
(anubhūtaviṣayāsampramoṣaḥ smr̥tiḥ). The sustained analysis of Utpaladeva
singles out a few crucial points contained in such an apparently simple
process: how is it possible to attribute temporal differentiation to a
cognizer that is permanent in his essential nature? What is the
relationship between the cognitive act of the original perception and
the cognitive act of the subsequent memory? How can the latter bring the
former to light again without objectifying it? On this point, in fact,
the Śaiva and his principal opponent, the Buddhist epistemologist, are
in full agreement: a cognition is self-luminous and cannot be the object
of another cognition. The standard Buddhist explanation is far from
being satisfactory: saying that the perception produces a saṁskāra,
which in turn will produce the phenomenon of memory, only accounts for
the fact that memory has a certain objective content but leaves out the
“subjective” component represented by the fact that the object has been
“coloured” by the previous perception, or, to be more precise, by its
having been “already” perceived in a certain past moment. Memory, in
fact, is indeed the memory of the past object but also of the past
perception of it. Instead, as Abhinavagupta says,5 what the saṁskāra is
able to convey (or resurrect) is neither the original perception nor the
object in so far as it was cognized by such past perception. This
presupposes a living organism at work, a dynamic and unitary
consciousness able to freely move between different moments of time.6
Having this in mind, Utpaladeva deliberately introduces an apparently
little but in fact quite significant change in the YS definition, by
reading asampramoṣaṇam in the place of asampramoṣaḥ.7 Due to the very
nature of the phenomenon of memory, consciousness is expected to work at
the level of individual subject, fully within the world of māyā. As
Utpaladeva puts it:8

For this function belongs to the Lord alone, identical with
consciousness, and takes place due to His freedom, in these terms: it is
the Lord that, having assumed the form of the [limited] knower,
identified with the puryaṣṭaka and other planes onto which freedom is
superimposed, cognizes, remembers or ascertains.

But how, analytically, does the process of memory work? Both the act of
ascertainment (niścaya, adhyavasāya) and memory belong to the category
of vikalpa, being the māyic form of vimarśa. The main difference between
adhyavasāya, immediately following the original manifestation (or
“shining”) of the object — i.e. its perception — and smr̥ti, which is
instead more or less distant from it, is that in the former case we have
the reflective awareness (parāmarśa) “this”, while in the latter we have
the reflective awareness “that”. However, according to the Pratyabhijñā
philosophy, only a parāmarśa of a presently “shining” object is
possible. So memory cannot have as its object something which only
“shone” in the past (Vr̥tti: prakāśitasya parāmarśo na kr̥taḥ syāt).9 Once
the matter has been put in these terms (the possibility that memory
might have as its “object” the former perception had been discarded at
the outset), Utpaladeva is able to point to the centrality of a dynamic
I as the only way to get out of the impasse. It is the I that ensures
the possibility of unifying the various cognitions occurring at
different times, thus resolving the apparent inconsistency between a
(present) vimarśa and a (past) anubhava. The one and same svasaṁvedana
of both cognitions creates that necessary bridge between them which the
Buddhist epistemologist fails to account for.10 A further clarification
is provided by Abhinavagupta in the ĪPVV (II: 32, ll. 10-13): the
prakāśa concerning the part-object (arthāṁśe) belongs to the past; but
the prakāśa as grasped by the vimarśa, concerning the part-self
(svātmāṁśe), is not limited by time. Thus the vimarśa in the memory can
connect itself with the vimarśa in the perception and, through it, with
the former light of the object — in this way meeting both requirements:
taking place in the present and not being divorced from prakāśa (Torella
2002: 106f., n 12).

In the course of the exploration of the mechanism of memory, Utpaladeva
has to explain his position with regard to the object of memory. The
object of memory is, in principle, the same as the object of perception:
the unique particular, the svalakṣaṇa of the Buddhists, belonging to a
specific time and space and having a specific form. But just as the
original perception had catched with definiteness only some aspects of
the svalakṣaṇa, so the memory usually resurrects only some aspects of
it, and not necessarily the same. The starting point of this long
digression, which will turn into an investigation into the nature of the
universal, the particular and their relationship, is the degree of
vividness of the remembered object. Vividness (sphuṭatva) depends on how
many aspects or components of the thing are manifested in memory. In
fact, the apparently unitary svalakṣaṇa is composed of a number of
“manifestations” (ābhāsa), each of them having the nature of
universal.11 But if it is true that the more numerous sāmānyas unite,
the more individualized is the object, and the more vivid is its
manifestation in memory, it is also true that sāmānyas are not on the
same plane. Even a single sāmānya can as well be manifested vividly,
when it comprises a multiplicity of broader universals (this is the
case, Utpaladeva says, of the universal dhava [Grislea tomentosa] with
respect, e.g. to the universal ‘treeness’). In referring to a hierarchy
of sāmānyas, Utpaladeva is likely to have in mind Bhartr̥hari’s
conception, as expressed in Jātisamuddeśa, v. 33 sambandhibhedāt
sattaiva bhidyamānā gavādiṣu । jātir ity ucyate [. . .] (cf. Helārāja’s
commentary, p. 41 bhidyamānā upacaritabhedā gavāśvādiṣu sattaiva
mahāsāmānyam eva jātiḥ gotvāśvatvādikā, aparasāmānyam). Bhartr̥hari, in
his turn, seems to derive this conception from the Vaiṣeśika-Sūtra
(I.21ff.),12 where the term sāmānyaviśeṣa appears for the first time.
Sāmānyaviśeṣa can be taken in a double meaning: “specific sāmānya” (vs.
the highest sāmānya: bhāva) and “being at the same time sāmānya and
viśeṣa”. Praśastapāda calls them para and apara sāmānya: the former
causes the notion of continuity, the latter that of distinction.13

Text14

[9v13] 15vivr̥tau16 smr̥tyādīnām idānīṁ jñānaprakaraṇenānena svarūpaṁ
nirūpayiṣyann aśeṣakālānugatasvatantrāvabodhalakṣa-
ṇātmatattvasvabhāveśvaraśaktirūpatāṁ pratipipādayiṣuḥ smr̥ter eva tāvat
suspaṣṭam īśvarātmasiddhihetuta[10r]yā prathamaṁ sambhavam āha ।।

sa hi pūrvānubhūtārthopalabdhā parato ’pi san ।

vimr̥śan sa iti svairī smaratīty apadiśyate ।। <1.4.1>

[. . .]17 ।। [11r10] vr̥ttiḥ ।। paścād api pūrvānubhūtārthānubhavitr̥tvāt
pūrvānubhūtārthaprakāśāsampramoṣaṇaṁ tasyaikasya vibhoḥ kartuḥ sa ity
atra pūrvānubhūtatvena pratyavamarśaḥ smr̥tir nāma vyāpāraḥ ।। vivr̥tiḥ ।।
bodhātmano nityatvenaitadavibhaktāyāḥ boddhr̥tāyāḥ nityatve ’pi18
tattattathānirmitavibhinnadeśakālopasarja- nārthoparāgeṇa
bodhaikarūpasyā[11v]rthānubhavasyāpi ca bhinnakālatvena
pūrvapaścādvyavahāraḥ । tad āha “paścād api” iti । ata eva
prakāśamānārthādhīnatvād asya kālavyavahārasya sūtre vr̥ttau
cārthaśabdopādānaḥ19 । viṣayopalabdhr̥tāpy arthasya pr̥thagbhāve
nopapannety antararthānupraveśadarśanārtham arthākāro ’nubhavitety
evamarthatātparyeṇa sūtravr̥ttyor arthaśabdaṣaṣṭhyās tr̥cāpi kr̥taḥ
samāsaḥ, sa ca jñāpakāt kvacid iṣṭaḥ, tr̥nnantena vā sādhanaṁ kr̥teti
dvitīyāsamāsaḥ । nanv arthasyānubhavamukhenaiva kālasaṁsparśo vakṣyate
viśeṣato ’nubhūtatānubhūyamānatādirūpeṇa । satyam etat, kintv
anādinidhanasyaivāsya sarvaśakteś cittattvasya māyā yat20
kālakramāvabhāsanavyāpārā kartr̥śaktiḥ saiva ca 21tadānīṁ kālaśaktisaṁjñā
tattadvividhāvabhāsanīyādikakarmavastu-saṁlagnatayā
kālakramopasarjanavicitrāvabhāsanādikriyārūpatayā prathate । 22eṣaiva hi
sā 23parameśvarasyāvabhāsanākhyā
kriyāntastattatpadārthāvavibhāyiṣātmakecchā[12r]prārambhā
bahistadavabhāsanaparyantā nānyat kiñcid iti vakṣyate । smr̥tikriyā24py
25asyaivaiṣaivāntaḥsthitānubhūtapūrvārthavimar- śecchopakramā bahiḥ sa
iti tatpūrvakāloparaktānubhūtabhāvā-vamarśanavasānā । tad āha
“anubhūtārthaprakāśa” iti । sampramoṣaṇam iti lyuḍantena
kartr̥vyāpāratāsphuṭīkaraṇāya nirdeśaḥ ghaṭādivailakṣaṇyena
sādhyamānatāprādhānyasya rūḍheḥ । cinmayasyeśvarasyaiva hi svātantryād
vyāpāro ’yaṁ yad eṣa samāropitasvātantrya26puryaṣṭakādipramātr̥rūpo
jānāti smaraty avasyati 27vā na tu svasāmarthyena pr̥thagbhūtānāṁ
jñānasmr̥tyādivastūnāṁ kāryakāraṇabhāvaḥ svatantrāṇāṁ yena viṣayabhedaś
codyate । ata eva “svairī” ity upāttaṁ vivr̥taṁ ca “kartur” iti,
anubhavasmaraṇakālavyāpitvaṁ “sa parato ’pi sann” iti sūtre nirdiṣṭaṁ
vivr̥taṁ ca “paścād api pūrvānubhūtārthānubhavitr̥tvād” iti । tathā
“ekasya” iti kartr̥taiva ca aiśvaryam uktam “vibhor” iti । kevalam
28anubhavo ’rthasya pravr̥ttatadarthāvabhā[12v]sapramātrantaraikībhā-
vanirmāṇamukhena tadānīṁ tadanubhavitr̥pratyagātmani
vakṣyamāṇanayenānupraveśo nirmāṇam ivāsyābhāsanād । avabhāty api tasminn
29atatsamāropāpohanātmanā niścayena vinā vyavahāro na pravartate, sa ca
niścayo ’nubhavakāla eva vā bhāvyate ’yam iti, anyadā vā sa iti,
ubhayathāpi vā । kālāntare tu sa niścayaḥ pratyavamarśātmā smr̥tir ity
ucyate । tad uktam “prakāśāsampramoṣaṇaṁ pratyavamarśa” iti ।
anugatadeśakā- lānavacchinnatattadābhāsamātrapratyavamarśe tu
vikalpamātram etac cottaratra vakṣyate <।। I.4.1 ।।>30

<Vivr̥ti> smr̥tivikalparūpaparāmarśasamaye deśakāl-ādyavacchedāt
tathāntaḥsthitasya bahir api tad idam
ityādisarvanāma31nirdeśyasyārthasya32 sāmarthyād eva prakāśo bhavatīty
āha ।।33 [. . .]

[13r6] bhāsayec ca svakāle ’rthāt pūrvābhāsitam āmr̥śan ।

svalakṣaṇaṁ ghaṭābhāsamātreṇāthākhilātmanā ।। <I.4.2>

[. . .]34 [14r8] Vr̥ttiḥ ।। smr̥tiśaktyā sa iti pūrvānubhūtaṁ svalakṣaṇaṁ
parāmr̥śan 35bhāsayaty evānyathā prakāśitasya parāmarśo na kr̥taḥ syāt
svasattākāla eva36 ca । tena smaraṇakāle naṣṭasyāpy ābhāso na duṣyati ।
kadācit tv arthitāvaśād ghaṭakā-
ñcanadravyasattādyanyatamaikābhāsarūpeṇaivāsyāsphuṭā-37 vabhāsaḥ, anyadā
tu sarvātmanārthitvena 38sphuṭa eva, atiśayanirantarāvahitacetasas tu
dr̥ṣṭārthapratyakṣīkāra eva ।।

Vivr̥tiḥ ।। smr̥tau deśakālādyavacchedena pūrvatayānubhūtaṁ parāmr̥śan
niyatarūpatayā svalakṣaṇātmānam arthaṁ parāmr̥śati । tad āha “smr̥tiśaktyā
” iti “svalakṣaṇam” iti ca । prakāśasvabhā[14v]vaś ca parāmarśo
yathāsau39 tasyāvaśyaṁ prakāśanena tathā bhāvyam, anyathā parāmarśanam
eva nopapadyeta,40 ato ’tra nāsti vivādaḥ। ata eva “bhāsayaty eva” ity
avadhāraṇaṁ tena ca sūtre liṅartho niyogakaraṇalakṣaṇe vivr̥taḥ । kevalaṁ
yad yathā parāmr̥śyate tat tathaivāvabhāsyate smr̥tau ca pūrvaprakāśitasya
parāmarśāt pūrvaprakāśita41tvenaivābhāsaḥ42 । tad āha “anyathā
prakāśitasya parāmarśo na kr̥taḥ syād” iti । eṣa eva ca
anubhūtaviṣayāsampramoṣaḥ । pūrvaprakāśitatvaṁ ca
pūrvātītadeśakālapramātrākāraviśeṣāvacchedenaiva prakāśanād bhavati ।
tad āha “svasattākāla eva ca” iti । tad evam anyathā
parāmarśanābhāvaprasaṅgāt paurvakālikasyārthābhāsasya samarthanāt
smaraṇakālayogānupayogāt pūrvāvabhāsasya smaraṇakāle nāśānāśavicāro
niṣphala eva । tad āha “smaraṇakāle naṣṭasyāpi” iti । etāvatā ca
smr̥titvam upapadyate ’nyathā pūrvārthāvabhāsānunmeṣe tad abhinavam eva
jñānāntaraṁ syāt pūrvārthamātraviṣayaṁ yogina iva । yogino hi yasya
prathamaḥ kālabhedaḥ sarvathā na vigalito māyāmaye [15r] puryaṣṭakādau
pramātary avasthānāparityāgāt tasya smaryamāṇair aparair atītaiḥ
sahacārī kaścid artho ’bhiyogavaśād adr̥ṣṭapūrvo ’pi tāvaty aṁśe
labdhasvarūponmeṣasya sākṣātkāreṇāvabhāti, pūrvānubhavāsaṁsparśenaiva vā
pramātur vikalpa eva kaścid atītaviṣayaḥ svecchayā kiṁ notpadyate rājā
mama pitābhavad ityādiḥ । atrātīte ’py arthe ’tītadeśādisahacāriṇi
jñānābhāsas tadānīntanas tadānīntanapramātr̥saṁlagnatvāt, smaraṇe tu
pūrvapramātr̥mayaḥ43 । tasmāt pūrvāvabhāsonmeṣaḥ smr̥tāv
avaśyābhyupagamanīyaḥ ।44 arthitvāc ca45 ābhogavaśena smr̥tāv upajātāyāṁ
ghaṭādyābhāsasyaiva kāñcanādyābhāsā- 46sambhinnasyāpi yathopayogaṁ
pūrvadeśakālābhāsādya-vacchedoparāgāt svalakṣaṇarūpasya smaraṇād asphuṭo
’sāv avabhāso bhavati । tad āha “kadācit tu” iti ।
pūrvadeśakālādyavacchedavirahe tu svatantravikalpeṣu
sāmānyākārasyaivāsyāsphuṭasyāvabhāsaḥ । sāmānyāny eva hi prabhūtāni
saṁbhūyānyonyāvacchedena vyavasthitāni sphuṭābhāsatām āsādya
deśādisāmānyābhāsā-vacchedena svalakṣaṇatāṁ bhajante । 47eka[15v]m api
ca sāmānyarūpaṁ śākhādimattvamātraṁ vr̥kṣatvaṁ
dhavakha-dirādivarṇasaṁsthānasāmānyavaicitryābhāsasaṁmiśraṁ
deśakālābhāsasāmānyasahasrasambhedabheditaṁ cānekātmatām āpadyate ।
svayam adeśakālabhedatve ’pi parasparaṁ bhedaḥ parasparaṁ
paryāyāvacchedaś ca sāmānyānām anekasvalakṣaṇatā-pattihetuḥ, teṣāṁ
cānuguṇyenaivānyonyāvacchedo bhavati śītasāmānyāgnisāmānyayos
tathātvābhāvāt । 48kiṁcic ca sāmānyam 49anyasāmānyānavacchede ’pi svata
evāneka- sāmānyamayaikasāmānyātmatayā svalakṣaṇatām anāpannam api
sphuṭaṁ bhavati yathā vr̥kṣatvāpekṣayā dhavatvādi । svabhāvatvena 50hy
aviśeṣitam api tadantapraviṣṭavr̥kṣatvādi sāmānyatāṁ na tu jāhāty eva,
deśakālabhedāvacchedenaiva hi svalakṣaṇībhāvaḥ । yadā punar
arthitāvaśenaiva sadghaṭakāñcanalohitatvādyābhāsasaṁvedanenaiva
pūrvadikkālābhāsasaṁbhedina evārthasya smaraṇaṁ tadā sphuṭa evābhāsaḥ ।
tad āha “anyadā tu” iti । 51kadācit punar atyantaikarasā-
52vadhānodyuktasya niravaśeṣaviśeṣaṇāvabhāsasāmānādhikara-
ṇyāpattiviśadīkr̥taḥ53 smaryamā[16r]ṇo ’rthaḥ sākṣātkāramaya eva sphuṭaṁ
puraḥ sphurati । tad āha “atiśayanirantara” iti । nairantaryam
avadhānasya 54vijātīyacittavyavahārābhāvo nairmalyam । 55tadā ca
pratyakṣībhāve ’pi pūrvadr̥ṣṭatayaiva pratyakṣībhāvād
anubhūtaviṣayāsampramoṣaḥ sutarām iti smr̥tibhedamadhyagaṇanāyāṁ na
kṣatiḥ । 56svatantro ’pi vikalpas
tattatpramāṇapariśuddhānekaviśeṣaṇaviśiṣṭāvabhāsonmukho yadā bhavati,
tadā sphuṭībhavaty eva so ’rthaḥ । tad uktaṁ
brahmādibhāṣaṇākarṇanaunmukhyād iti । 57tadā ca 58vikalpatā syān
nirvikalpatā 59veti nāsmākaṁ grahaḥ । parāmarśaśūnyatā tu na kvācid api
vidyate tādātmyāt sarvaprakāśānāṁ । sarvatrānusmaraṇādau ca
cittattvasyaiva svātantryaṁ, na tu svakāraṇasāmarthyād udbhavatīti
pratipādayituṁ “pūrvābhāsitam” iti “ābhāsayati” iti ca ṇicā nirdeśaḥ
kr̥taḥ “prakāśitasya” iti ca <I.IV.2>60

Translation

Vivr̥ti: The author, who, with the present section on knowledge, is going
now to describe the specific nature of memory, etc.61 — with the aim to
demonstrate that memory is formed by the power of the Lord, constituting
the very nature of the self as characterized by a free dynamic awareness
running through all times — starts in fact his proving argument
precisely with respect to memory, since in a very clear manner memory
can serve as a logical reason for the establishment of the identity of
the self with the Lord.62

I.4.1. The Free One (svairī), the perceiver of the object formerly
perceived, continuing also to exist later, has the reflective awareness:
“that”: this is what is called “remembering”.

Vr̥tti: The light-perception of the object formerly perceived is not
extinguished (asaṁpramoṣaṇam) [at the moment of memory],63 since he [the
knowing subject, the Lord] also continues to exist later as the
perceiver of the object formerly perceived. To have here a reflective
awareness of an object in terms of “that” — as formerly perceived — on
the part of him who is one, the Lord, the agent: this is the function
called “memory”.

Vivr̥ti: Although the cognizer is permanent in his essential nature,
since permanent is the consciousness from which his nature is never
divided, the notions of “before” and “after” can be applied [to the self
and his cognitive activity] in common experience on account of the
temporal differentiation of the object perceptions,64 whose essence is
in fact solely consciousness: this [seeming] temporal differentiation is
due to the influence of the objects, which are various (tattatº),
created [by the Lord’s freedom] in such a modality (ºtathānirmitaº),65
separated [from the consciousness and among themselves] (ºvibhinnaº) and
qualified by time and space (ºdeśakālopasarjanaº).66 This is said [in
the Vr̥tti] with the phrase “also later”.

Precisely because of this — i.e. the fact that the use in common
experience of the notion of time depends on the objects in so far as
they are manifested — the Sūtra and the Vr̥tti have the word “object”
(arthaº). But also the condition of perceiver of any content of
perception (viṣayaº) would be inadmissible were the object separated
[from the perceiver]. Therefore, in order to indicate that there is an
inner interpenetration with the object, [both the Sūtra and the Vr̥tti
intend to state that:] “the perceiver has the form of the object”.67 It
is having this intention in mind that both in the Sūtra and the Vr̥tti
the author compounds artha, which would have the genitive ending in the
analytic sentence, with anubhavitr̥ ending with the agent suffix tr̥c.
Such a compound is to be accepted as correct in some particular cases68
due to a jñāpaka.69 Or else, we can take it as composed by the words
artha and anubhavitr̥ with the latter interpreted as ending with the
agent suffix tr̥n (tr̥nnantena). In this manner, the compound comes to be
a dvitīyāsamāsa, allowed on the basis of [the vārttika] “a factor [can
be compounded] with a word ending with a primary suffix” (sādhanaṁ
kr̥tā).70

[Objection:] But later on71 the text will put the matter in a different
way, i.e. that it is instead through the perception that the contact of
the object with time occurs, in the form of “[the object] has been
perceived, is being perceived, and so on”. [Reply:] This is true.
However, to this Consciousness-principle, which is indeed in itself
without beginning or end and possesses all powers, belongs māyā, i.e.
the power of the agent subject whose activity is the manifestation of
the temporal succession, and then this very power, with the denomination
of “power of Time”, appears in the form of various and multiform
activities like “making manifest” and so on, qualified by temporal
succession in so far as they depend on their objects, i.e. the various
and multiform things to be manifested, and so on. This is the action
named “manifestation” (ābhāsanaº), belonging to Parameśvara; it begins
with the will, consisting of the internal manifestation of the various
things, and ends with their external manifestation. It is this and
nothing else, as we shall see.72

Also the act of memory ultimately belongs to Him. In fact, memory starts
with the wish to regain the reflective awareness of an object perceived
in the past and currently stored internally (antaḥ),73 and ends
externally74 with the [present] reflective awareness [of the object] in
terms of “that” — i.e. the reflective awareness of the object as
formerly perceived (ºanubhūtabhāvaº),75 “coloured” by [the reflective
awareness belonging to] that former time.76 He means this when he says
[in the Vr̥tti]: “the light of the object perceived”.

By using the lyuḍanta word [a]sampramoṣaṇa77 he means to clarify the
fact that memory is a function of the agent subject, since [in such
words]78 the aspect of “being brought about” is conventionally deemed as
predominant, whereas it not so with words like “jar” and so on.79 For
this function belongs to the Lord alone, identical with consciousness,
and takes place due to His freedom, in these terms: it is the Lord that,
having assumed the form of the [limited] knower,80 identified with the
puryaṣṭaka and other planes to which freedom is superimposed
(samāropitasvā- tantryaº), cognizes, remembers or ascertains.81 And it
is not that by their own power (svasāmarthyena) cognition, memory and so
on, conceived of as entities (ºvastūnām), separated from [any agent
subject], establish among themselves a cause–effect relationship
independently,82 so that this thesis would lend itself to the criticism
that there is a different object (viṣayabhedaḥ).83

For this very reason, the Kārikā says ‘the Free One’ (svairī) glossed by
the Vr̥tti with ‘[of] the agent’ (kartuḥ). The capacity of the agent
subject to embrace both the time of perception and the time of memory is
stated in the Kārikā by the phrase “continuing also to exist later” (sa
parato ’pi san), commented on by the Vr̥tti with “since he also continues
to exist later as the perceiver of the object formerly perceived”
(paścād api pūrvānubhūtārthānubhavitr̥tvād). Then, “of Him who is one”
(ekasya) sovereignty, i.e. his being the agent subject is indicated with
the word “of the Lord” (vibhoḥ).84

But there is a difference to specify (kevalam):85 the object perception
consists in the entrance [of the knower] — through the “creation” of his
unification with other knowing subjects in whom the appearance of a
certain object is taking place — into the dimension of individual
subject, namely, of the perceiver of that same object at that very time
(how this can happen we will explain later on); this perception is in a
sense also a creation, since that object is made manifest.86 Even if
that object shines in perception (avabhāty api), it cannot enter worldy
transactions without an act of ascertainment (niścayena), consisting in
the exclusion of different objects which might be wrongly superimposed
on to it. And such ascertainment may occur at the very moment of
perception, thus producing the notion “this”, or in a different moment,
thus producing the notion “that”, or with a combination of the two
times.87 But if this ascertainment takes place subsequently (kālāntare),
having the [former] reflective awareness as its very essence, then we
call it “memory”.88 This has been said [in the Vr̥tti, with the phrase]:
“the non-extinction of the light [. . .] the reflective awareness”.
Instead, if there is a reflective awareness of this or that
manifestation as not delimited by the space and time that were
originally connected with them, we have a generic vikalpa
(vikalpamātram).89 This topic will be dealt with later on.90 – I.4.1.

Vivr̥ti: When reflective awarenesses in the form of that particular
mental construct, i.e. memory occurs, there is, as a matter of fact
(sāmarthyād eva), the manifestation of the object as being internal, and
external as well,91 with the delimitation by place, time, etc. The
object may be indicated through various pronouns like “that”, “this” and
so on. The Kārikā says:

I.4.2. As a matter of fact (arthāt), [he who remembers] must
necessarily, having a reflective awareness (āmr̥śan) of the particular
entity (svalakṣaṇam) formerly made manifest, make it manifest at the
actual moment of the memory (svakāle), either as a single manifestation
“jar” or as the totality of its components (akhilātmanā).

Vr̥tti: Thanks to the power of memory, the subject, when having a
reflective awareness as “that” of the particular entity formerly
perceived, does make it manifest [in the present] (bhāsayaty eva).
Otherwise, with regard to an object made manifest [only in the past] no
reflective awareness could take place (prakāśitasya parāmarśo na kr̥taḥ
syāt);92 and this manifestation occurs at the very moment of the act of
remembering. Therefore, the manifestation at the time of the memory also
of an object that has disappeared does not create any shortcoming [for
the explanation of the phenomenon of memory].93 At certain times, then,
the object appears in the form of a single manifestation, i.e. limited
to one of the many manifestations that constitute it, such as — in the
case of a jar — “jar [in general]” “golden”, “individual substance”
“existence” etc. depending on the subject’s intentions. In these cases,
its manifestation [in memory] is dim (asphuṭaº).94 At other times,
instead, the object appears in its totality, since this is the subject’s
intention: its manifestation is indeed vivid. And, finally, the subject
whose mind is intensely concentrated without interruption even directly
visualizes the object formerly perceived.

Vivr̥ti: In memory, when the subject has a reflective awareness of the
object as formerly perceived, endowed with a spatial, temporal, etc.
delimitation, he is aware of the object as a particular entity in so far
as it has a well defined nature.95 This is said [by the Vr̥tti] with the
words “thanks to the power of memory” (smr̥tiśaktyā) and “the particular
entity” (svalakṣaṇam). Just as the reflective awareness is the essential
nature of the light of manifestation,96 so it must necessarily be
accompanied by the becoming manifest of the object, without which the
act of reflective awareness itself would become impossible.97 Therefore,
on this point there is no possible disagreement. Precisely for this
reason there is [in the Vr̥tti] the emphatic statement “it does make it
manifest” (bhāsayaty eva), by which the meaning of the optative form
(liṅ) in the Sūtra [ābhāsayet] is commented on in the sense of being
characterized by “obligation” (niyogakaraṇaº).98 But we should introduce
a specification (kevalam):99 the manifestation of the object depends
directly on the modality of the reflective awareness concerning it, and
in memory the object appears as something made manifest in the past,
since the reflective awareness of it is precisely that of something
which has been made manifest in the past.100 This is said [in the
Vr̥tti]: “Otherwise, with regard to an object made manifest [only in the
past] no reflective awareness could take place”. And it is precisely in
this that the “non-extinction of the object formerly perceived”
consists.101And we can speak of something “made manifest in the past” in
the sense that the manifestation of that object was delimited by [the
association with] a specific previous past place and time, a specific
subject, a specific form. This is said [in the Vr̥tti]: “and [this
manifestation occurs] at the very moment of the act of remembering”.
This is how the matter stands, for otherwise any discussion whether the
past manifestation of the object is extinguished or not at the time of
memory would turn out to be vain: it would be so since there would be no
point in stating its connection with the time of memory once it has been
established that the manifestation of the object has occurred in the
past [only], for in this case the impossibility of the reflective
awareness concerning it would necessarily ensue. This is said [in the
Vr̥tti]: “[the manifestation], at the time of the memory, also of the
object that has disappeared”.102 Only the above description, taken en
bloc (etāvatā), can account correctly for the phenomenon of memory, for
otherwise — i.e. in the case that the previous manifestation of the
object does not come into play — we would have just yet another specific
cognition, a new one, concerning the previous object in its generic
form,103

as in the case of the yogin. In fact,104 in the yogin the original
full-fledged temporal differentiation has not yet totally disappeared,
due to his still residing in a condition where the māyic subjectivity is
identified with the puryaṣṭaka, etc.: to him, thanks to the power of a
most intense application (abhiyogavaśāt), a certain [past] object, being
associated with other past objects currently being remembered, though
not having been itself perceived previously (apūrvadr̥ṣṭo ’pi), is
manifested through direct perception, since the yogin has experienced a
disclosion of his own essential nature with regard to some definite part
[of the content of his cognition] (tāvaty aṁśe).105 Or else, why not
speak of a mere conceptual construct whatsoever concerning some past
object, which arises at will in the subject without any contact with a
previous perception, as for example “my father was a king”? In these
cases, the manifestation of the cognition with respect to an object
which belongs itself to the past and is associated with a past place,
etc. belongs to that [past] time, since it resides in subjects of that
[past] time, while in the case of memory the cognition is manifested [in
the present] as related to previous subjects.106 Therefore, it is
necessarily to be admitted that in memory the past manifestation emerges
again. And once the memory has arisen thanks to an intense mental
application depending on the requirements of the subject, we may have
the recollection of a single manifestation only, like “jar [in
general]”, etc. even not combined with other manifestations like “made
of gold”, etc. depending on what may serve [on that occasion] the
subject’s need; such single manifestation (“jar”, etc.) has the form of
unique particular (svalakṣaṇarūpasya) due to its being “coloured” by the
delimitation by a previous space and time, etc. As a consequence, the
manifestation of the object recollected will be a dim one (asphuṭaḥ).107
This is said [in the Vr̥tti] with “at certain times, then [. . .]”. Then,
in autonomous mental constructs, the manifestation of the object, taken
solely in its universal form, without being “coloured” by the
delimitation by a previous space, time, etc. is [also] not vivid. In
fact (hi),108 [a group formed by] many universals, when combined among
themselves and set in a relationship of mutual delimitation, become
vivid, and, in the end, once delimited by the universals of space, etc.
they attain the status of particular realities (svalakṣaṇatāṁ bhajante).
Treeness (vr̥kṣatvam), which yet is one (ekam api) in its universal form
consisting exclusively of being endowed with branches, etc. once it is
combined with a full variety of universals of colour and shape, such as
those of the dhava or khadira trees, and differentiated by myriads of
combinations with the universals of the manifestions of space and time,
becomes many (anekātmatām āpadyate). Even if in themselves they are
exempt from spatio-temporal differentiations, universals give rise to a
multiplicity of particular realities by virtue of their being
differentiated from one another and of their mutually delimiting one
another now in one way, now in another.109 This mutual delimitation must
comply with a criterion of compatibility, and, therefore, cannot take
place, for instance, in the case of the universals “cold” and “fire”,
which do not possess such compatibility. Then there are certain
universals which, even without entering into relations of delimitation
with other universals, are by themselves (svata eva) manifested in a
vivid manner without this entailing their assuming the status of
particular realities, but only thanks to the multiplicity of universals
that they, in their unity, encompass. For example, this is the case of
the universal dhava with respect to the universal “tree”, since the
former, though not being particularized as regards its own nature,
contains within itself other universals such as “tree”, etc. But this
does not mean that it ceases to be an universal, because to become a
particular the universal must be delimited by spatio-temporal
differentiation.

When, however, depending on the subject’s requirement, the object is
remembered as associated with the manifestation of a previous space and
time along with the perception of many manifestations such as
“existent”, “golden” and “red”, its appearance [in memory] will be
indeed vivid (sphuṭa eva). This is said [in the Vr̥tti] with “at other
times, instead [. . .]”. Sometimes, then, when one is intent on
remembering something with an especially intense concentration, the
object being remembered, rendered clear and limpid by referring to it
all its attributes — excluding none — vividly appears before him,
amounting in fact to something directly perceived (sākṣātkāramaya eva).
This is said in the Vr̥tti with “intensely [concentrated], without
interruption”. The absence of interruptions in the concentration is the
absence in it of the flowing of extraneous thoughts, its being pure. And
in this case, although there is an immediate perception [i.e. a direct
visualization] of the object, the object comes to be immediately
perceived [not as present but] as having been experienced in the past.
Thus, even more appropriately (sutarām), one is allowed to speak of
non-extinction of the object perceived [in the past]
(anubhūtaviṣayāsampramoṣaḥ):110 therefore, there is no incongruity in
including this type of experience among the various forms of memory.

Also when the autonomous mental construct111 turns to the manifestation
of something that has been proved beyond doubt by various means of right
knowledge and is distinguished by many attributes, then the concerned
object becomes indeed vivid (sphuṭībhavaty eva). This has been said:112
“Due to the fact of being intent in listening or speaking to Brahmā or
other deities”.113 We are not interested here in settling whether this
experience is to be considered a mental construct or not. On the other
hand, at no moment may we speak of the absence of reflective awareness,
because this is the very essence of all lights [of cognition]. And in
every cognitive experience, such as memory and so on, it is the freedom
precisely of this consciousness-principle to be at work: it is not
simply produced thanks to the power of its specific immediate cause. It
is in order to show this that [in the Sūtra and the Vr̥tti] causative
forms are used, like “formerly made manifest” (pūrvābhāsitam), “makes it
manifest” (ābhāsayati), “[of an object] made manifest [only in the
past]” (prakāśitasya).114

* Originally published in: Indica et Tibetica. Festschrift für Michael
Hahn zum 65. Geburtstag von Freunden und Schülern überreicht,
herausgegeben von Konrad Klaus und Jens-Uwe Hartmann, Wien 2007, pp.
539-63.

Bibliography

Texts

Bhāskarī of Bhāskarakaṣṭha, A Commentary on the
Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vimarśinī of Abhinavagupta, 2 vols., ed. K.A.S. Iyer
and K.C. Pandey (The Princess of Wales Sarasvati Bhavana Texts 70, 83),
Allahabad, 1938-50.

ĪPK = Īśvarapratyabhijñākārikā of Utpaladeva with Svavr̥tti (see Torella
2002).

ĪPV = Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vimarśinī of Abhinavagupta, ed. by Mukund Rām
Shastri, 2 vols., KSTS 22, 33, Bombay, 1918-21.

ĪPVV = Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vivr̥ti-Vimarśinī of Abhinavagupta, ed. by
Madhusudan Kaul Shastri, 3 vols., KSTS 60, 62, 65, Bombay, 1938-43.

Kāśikā-Vr̥tti of Vāmana-Jayāditya with Nyāsa or Pañcikā Commentary of
Jinendrabuddhi and Padamañjarī of Haradatta Miśra, ed. Swami Dwarika Das
Shastri and Kalika Prasad Shukla, 6 vols., Varanasi, 1983.

Laghu-Paribhāṣā-Vr̥tti of Puruṣottamadeva (see Paribhāṣā-Saṁgraha).

Padārthadharmasaṁgraha of Praśāstapāda with Śrīdharabhaṭṭa’s
Nyāyakandalī, ed. Durgādhara Jhā Śarmā (Gaṅgānāthajhā-Granthamālā 1),
Varanasi, 1977.

Paribhāṣāsaṁgraha, ed. K.V. Abhyankar, Poona, 1967.

PV = Pramāṇa-Vārttika of Dharmakīrti with the Commentary ‘Vr̥tti’ of
Acharya Manorathanandin, critically ed. Swami Dwarikadas Shastri,
Varanasi, 1968.

PV = Pramāṇavārttikam of Dharmakīrti, The First Chapter with the
Autocommentary, text and critical notes by R. Gnoli (Serie Orientale
Roma 23), Roma, 1960.

Vaiśeṣikasūtra of Kaṇāda with the Commentary of Candrānanda, critically
ed. Muni Śrī Jambuvijaya-Ji, Baroda, 1982.

VP = Vākyapadīya of Bhartr̥hari with the Commentary of Helārāja, Kāṇḍa
III, part 1, critically ed. K.A.S. Iyer (Deccan College Monograph Series
21), Poona, 1963.

VP = Vākyapadīya (mūlakārikās) of Bhartr̥hari, ed. W. Rau (Abhandlungen
für die Kunde des Morgenlandes 42,4), Wiesbaden, 1977.

Vyākaraṇa-Mahābhāṣya of Patañjali, ed. F. Kielhorn, 3rd edn., rev. and
furnished with additional readings, references and select critical notes
by K.V. Abhyankar, 3 vols., Poona, 1962-72.

Vyākaraṇa-Mahābhāṣya of Patañjali with Nāgojibhaṭṭa’s Uddyota and
Kaiyaṭa’s Pradīpa [. . .], ed. with footnotes [. . .] by Guru Prasad
Shastri (rev. by Bal Shastri), 5 vols., Varanasi, 1987-88.

Translations and studies

Lazzeroni, R., 1997, “L’espressione dell’agente come categoria
linguistica. I nomi indoeuropei in -Tér / -Tor”, in T. Bolelli and S.
Sani (eds.) Scritti scelti di Romano Lazzeroni, Pisa, pp. 85-95
[originally published in: Studi e saggi linguistici (1992), 32: 233ff.].

Sharma, R.N., 1995, The Aṣṭādhyāyī of Pāṇini, vol. 3: English
Translation of Adhyāyas Two and Three [. . .], New Delhi.

Torella, R., 1987, “Examples of the Influence of Sanskrit Grammar on
Indian Philosophy”, East and West, 37: 151-64.

———, 1988, “A Fragment of Utpaladeva’s Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vivr̥ti”, East
and West, 38: 137-74.

———, 1992, “The Pratyabhijñā and the Logical–Epistemological School of
Buddhism”, in T. Goudriaan (ed.) Ritual and Speculation in Early
Tantrism: Studies in Honor of André Padoux, Albany (NY), pp. 327-45.

———, 2002, The Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Kārikā of Utpaladeva with the Author’s
Vr̥tti, Critical Edition and Annotated Translation, 2nd edn., Delhi [1st
edn., Roma 1994 (Serie Orientale Roma 71)].

———, 2012, “Observations on Yogipratyakṣa” in Ch. Watanabe et al. (eds.)
Saṁskr̥ta-sādhutā — Goodness of Sanskrit Studies in Honour of Professor
Ashok N. Aklujkar, New Delhi: D.K. Printworld, pp. 470-87.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 This paper that I have dedicated to Prof. Michael Hahn as a token of
appreciation to the scholar and of affection to the old friend is
perhaps a bit far away from his preferred field of research, but I
remember what once he told me during my stay at his house at Odendorf:
that the fact that we both liked to work on unpublished sources created
a stronger link between us than the mere sharing the same subject. . . .

2 Torella 2002: xl-xlv.

3 BhG XV.15b: mattaḥ smr̥tir jñānam apohanaṁ ca (From Me derive memory,
knowledge and exclusion).

4 So we read at the very beginning of the Vivr̥ti on 1.4.1; see below, p.
409.

5 See below, n 83.

6 The point has been explicitly touched, in a different context, by
Utpaladeva in ĪPK 1.3.2cd [. . .] saṁskārajatvaṁ tu tattulyatvaṁ na
tadgatiḥ “The fact that [memory] arises from latent impressions implies
its similarity to the former perception, but not its cognition of that.”
The saṁskāra of the former perception is awakened by a present
perception — similar to the other — which gives rise to the memory. The
saṁskāra, therefore, ensures this “similarity” in the memory, but the
memory itself has no direct access to (cannot “know”) the former
perception, nor can it, strictly speaking, establish the similarity
between the latter and the present perception which has been reawakened
by the saṁskāra (Torella 2002: 99f. n 4). Vr̥tti thereon: “Since memory
arises from the latent impression left by the former perception, it only
bears a similarity to that perception but does not have direct cognition
of the latter; and, moreover, as there is no cognition of the former
perception not even the similarity to it can be maintained.”

7 A lyuḍanta word like asampramoṣaṇam is more inclined to express a
process than the ghañanta word asampramoṣaḥ. See below, n 78.

8 See below, p. 410.

9 See below, p. 411.

10 Cf. ĪPVV II: 17, ll. 22f.: anubhavasmr̥tyor ekaṁ svasaṁvedanarūpam
ekaviṣayatopalambhāt.

11 Utpaladeva’s concept of svalakṣaṇa seems (and, in a sense, indeed is)
just the opposite of the Buddhist’s (for a detailed discussion see
Torella 1992: 332-36). For the Buddhist epistemologist the starting
point is the particular; perception grasps it in its entirety but is
also inexpressible and uncommunicable; many different niścayas may stem
from this single perceptual content, each of them captures a part of it
and connects it with a word, which therefore denotes a certain sāmānya
(or rather the negation of what is other than that feature). For
Utpaladeva, each pramāṇa grasps an individual ābhāsa (which is a
sāmānya), expressed by a determinate word, depending on a determinate
reflective awareness, or grasps — in the perception itself and not in a
later cognitive act — a group of ābhāsas coordinated by the Lord’s power
of necessity around a dominant ābhāsa, which allows the perception to
remain unitary. The group of ābhāsas taken in its totality ultimately
corresponds to the Buddhist svalakṣaṇa. The two conceptions are after
all not so opposed to each other: Utpaladeva’s svalakṣaṇa clearly
derives from the svalakṣaṇa of the Buddhists, only with a significantly
inverted perspective.

12 See in particular I.2.3 (Candrānanda) sāmānyaṁ viśeṣa iti
buddhyapekṣam, I.2.4 bhāvaḥ sāmānyam eva, I.2.5 dravyatvaṁ guṇatvaṁ
karmatvaṁ ca sāmānyani viśeṣāś ca, etc.

13 Cf. p. 741: sāmānyaṁ dvividhaṁ — param aparaṁ ca; p. 743: tatra
sattāsāmānyaṁ param anuvr̥ttikāraṇam eva; p. 746: aparaṁ [. . .]
anuvr̥ttivyāvr̥ttihetutvāt sāmānyaṁ viśeṣaś ca bhavati. See also
Bhartr̥hari, Jātisamuddeśa, v. 14 anupravr̥ttidharmo vā jātis syāt
sarvajātiṣu । vyāvr̥ttidharmasāmānyaṁ viśeṣe jātir iṣyate.

14 The words underlined in the text are those literally cited in the
ĪPVV. Punctuation is mine (that found in the MS is often misleading). In
the edition, <. . .> means “addition with respect to the transmitted
text”; [. . .], means “elimination of portions of the transmitted text”
(also the indications “folio” and “line” are between square brackets).
The sandhi has been “normalized”. The establishing of the text has
resulted from the delicate balance of sometimes divergent factors: the
text as transmitted by the codex unicus, internal coherence, literal
citations in the ĪPVV, paraphrases in the ĪPVV, parallel texts. A few
literal citations from the Vivr̥ti can be found in the footnotes of the
KSTS edn. of the ĪPV, which have been derived from the marginal notes of
an important ms of ĪPV, that indicated as Gh in the edition of the ĪPV
(the ms is now at the National Archives, Delhi, where I have consulted
it). When the transmitted text has been modified, this has been pointed
out by using three different expressions: correction, conjectural
emendation and tentative restoration. The first is felt as virtually
certain, the second as highly probable, the third as a mere attempt.

15 The MS regularly reads vivr̥tti- instead of vivr̥ti-.

16 The avataraṇikā of the Vivr̥ti is cited in ĪPV I: 115f., n 17.

17 The Kārikā is followed by the text of the ĪPV thereon.

18 Abhinavagupta seems to have a partly different text: ĪPVV II: 5, ll.
10f. ‘tena’ iti bodhena । ‘te’ iti anubhūyamānāḥ [. . .]. But neither
tena nor te fit the context of the transmitted text, which on the other
hand is confirmed by the paraphrase found in ĪPVV immediately after the
above passage: p. 5, ll. 11-14 ‘tathā’ iti svarūpād avibhaktā api
bodhasvātantryaprakāreṇa nirmitavibhaktatām iva āpāditāḥ, ata eva
vicitraṁ kr̥tvā bhinnā bodhāc ca anyonyaṁ ca, tata eva deśakālaviśeṣaṇā
ye arthāḥ, taiḥ prakāśamāṇair yaḥ uparāgaḥ, tena hetunā [. . .]. The
reading ºviśeṣaṇaº would seem preferable to ºupasarjanaº MS, but cf. p.
8, ll. 24f. kevalam apradhānatayā tasya prathanam iti viśeṣaṇatvam
upasarjanatvāt.

19 ºupādānaḥ, my conjectural emendation, ºupādānāt MS (cf. ibid. p. 5,
ll. 21f. ‘ata eva’ śaṅkitaṁ pūrvapakṣam arthaśabdopādāne hetutvena
upajīvati).

20 kālaº, my correction for akālaº MS (cf. p. 8, l. 9 kartr̥śakteḥ
kālakramāvabhāsanaṁ nāma vyāpāraḥ).

21 Apparently in the text that Abhinavagupta had before him there was
tatra in the place of tadānīṁ (p. 8, l. 8 ‘tatra’ iti māyāviṣaye).

22 eṣaiva, my correction for eṣava MS.

23 parameśvarasyāº, my correction for parameśvarāº MS.

24 yā added above the line.

25 asyaivaiṣaivāntaḥº, my conjectural emendation for asyaivaiṣavāntaḥº
MS.

26 ºsvātantryaº cit. p. 11, l. 14, incorrectly, as ºsvātantrye.

27 vā na tu, my correction for vā ’nantaº MS (na tu, strictly required
by meaning, is cit. p. 11, l. 25).

28 anubhavo ’rthasya pravr̥ttaº, my conjectural emendation for anubhavam
arthasya pravr̥ttam MS. In emending the transmitted text, I have taken
into account the long and complex explanation of the passage given by
Abhinavagupta (p. 14, l. 23 and p. 15, l. 17).

29 atatº, my correction for ataḥ MS.

30 MS has: ।। 25 ।। 1 ।।

31 ºnirdeśyasya, my correction for ºnirdeśasya MS.

32 Here MS adds syād eva, then deleted.

33 The avataraṇikā of the ĪPV follows.

34 The text of ĪPV follows.

35 All the mss of the Vr̥tti (and, accordingly, my edition) have
ābhāsayati.

36 I add ca, omitted in MS (and also in one of the mss I used for my
edition of the Vr̥tti) but explicitly cited by Abhinavagupta (p. 12, ll.
19-21 [. . .] “svasattākāla eva ca” ity anena vr̥ttau sphuṭīkr̥taḥ । tena
smr̥tikāle eva ca ābhāsayatīti vr̥ttiyojanā).

37 The evidence of the Vivr̥ti induces me to accept the reading
asphuṭāvabhāsaḥ instead of sphuṭāvabhāsaḥ, as found in my edition of the
Vr̥tti (both readings had been transmitted by the mss). I read ºavabhāsaḥ
instead of ºābhāsaḥ MS (all the mss of the Vr̥tti read ºāvabhāsaḥ, which
is also confirmed p. 25, l. 19 yā vr̥ttiḥ “avabhāsa” ity antā).

38 MS reads tathaiva sphuṭa eva; the same reading can be found in three
mss of the Vr̥tti (J, T; Ch; in Ch sphuṭa eva is added in the margin),
while the rest of the mss read tathaiva only. In my edition of the Vr̥tti
I had accepted tathaiva and considered sphuṭa eva an old gloss
interpolated into the text. Now, if, as I believe after taking into
consideration the arguments of the Vivr̥ti, in the previous line we must
read asphuṭāvabhāsaḥ, it is instead tathaiva to be deleted and only
sphuṭa eva to be left.

39 See below n 42.

40 MS has ºdyate then corrected to ºdyeta.

41 ºtaº added above the line.

42 What may appear in p. 22, ll. 12-14 as a quotation is in fact a
paraphrase: ‘anubhūtasyāvaśyaṁ prakāśaḥ’ iti ‘pūrvābhāsitatvenaiva
prakāśaḥ’ iti ca vyākhyātam [. . .].

43 I would be tempted to add here something like idānīntanaḥ making
contrast with the previous tadānīntanaḥ; idānīntanaḥ is in any case to
be implicitly understood, if we want to obtain the expected meaning.

44 N 62 of ĪPV I: 124 reads as follows: yathoktaṁ madhyapratyabhijñāyāṁ)
arthitāvaśāt smr̥tāv upajāyamānāyāṁ ghaṭādyābhāsasyaiva
kāñcanādyābhāsasaṁbhinnasyāpi yathopayogaṁ
pūrvadeśakālābhāsādyavacchedoparāgāt svalakṣaṇarūpasya smaraṇād asāv
avabhāso bhavati iti. The quotation shows some significant divergence
from the text I have established, also confirmed by Abhinavagupta’s
comments. Some substantial doubt remains only with regard to
upajātāyāṁ/upajāyamānāyāṁ, the latter fitting the context better.

45 ābhogaº, my correction for bhogaº MS. The detailed comments of
Abhinavagupta refer to the reading ābhogaº (ĪPVV II: 25, ll. 20-23: ā
samantāt bhogaḥ saṁvedanāntarbruḍitā- nantabhāvasaṁskāramadhyanimagnasya
cidbhāvasya unmeṣaṇātmakapālanacarvaṇavyāpāro ’nveṣaṇātmā, ābhogaś
cintāsantatilakṣaṇaṁ prā[read: pra]ṇidhāṇam).

46 With some hesitation I correct ºsambhinnasyāpi MS to
ºasambhinnasyāpi. The latter is the reading that Abhinavagupta’s remarks
(p. 25, l. 23 – p. 24, l. 4) seem to presuppose.

47 ekam api ca, my conjectural emendation for ekam api tat MS (the
pratīka p. 26, l. 25 reads evam api ca, but see the objection which
immediately precedes it: [. . .] tatra vr̥kṣa iti ekabuddhiḥ katham).

48 I have accepted the reading kiṁcic ca, quoted by Abhinavagupta, which
better fits the context; kiñca MS.

49 anyasāmānyānavacchede, my correction for atyasāmānyāvacchede MS.
anyasāmānyānavacchede is what the sense requires and is also confirmed
by Abhinavagupta’s paraphrase (p. 28, ll. 5f.): anyena vyatiriktatayā
parāmr̥ṣṭena ābhāsāntareṇa aviṣeśitatve ’pi.

50 The original reading of MS was hi, then corrected to hy aº.

51 The passage kadācit punar [. . .] na kṣatiḥ is quoted in ĪPV I: 125,
n 67: yathoktam aṣṭasahasryām — kadācit punar
atyantaikarasādhānodyuktasya niravaśeṣaviśeṣaṇāvabhāsasā-
mānādhikaraṇyāpattiviśadīkr̥taḥ smaryamāṇo ’rthaḥ sākṣātkāramaya eva
sphuṭaṁ puraḥ sphurati, tathā ca pratyakṣībhāve ’pi pūrva dr̥ṣṭatayaiva
pratyakṣībhāvād anubhūtaviṣayāsampramoṣaḥ sutarām iti
smr̥tibhedamadhyagaṇanāyāṁ na kṣatiḥ. The text is the same as in MS,
apart from tathā instead of tadā MS and the omission of the passage tad
āha [. . .] nairmalyam.

52 ºavadhānaº, my conjectural emendation for ºādhānaº MS. Cf. the
following avadhānasya.

53 ºkr̥tāḥ MS, then corrected to ºkr̥taḥ.

54 vijātīyacittavyavahārābhāvo nairmalyam, my tentative restoration for
vijātīyacittayāvyavahārābhāvanairmalyam MS, evidently corrupt.

55 ĪPVV II: 30, l. 2 quotes, incorrectly, tadā na.

56 P. 30, ll. 14-15 quotes, incorrectly, svatantre ’pi.

57 tadā hi MS, for which I substitute the more congruous tadā ca, quoted
ibid.: l. 23.

58 vikalpatā, my correction for vikalpaḥ MS. The expected reading
vikalpatā, required by the following nirvikalpatā, is indirectly
confirmed ibid., l. 23 tat kathaṁ vikalpatā ukteti.

59 P. 31, l. 1, vāśabdo ’tra na saṁśaye, api tu sambhavavikalpe.

60 MS has: ।। 25 ।। 2 ।।

61 See n 3.

62 If Utpaladeva decides to start with memory (out of the three śaktis
under consideration: the above-mentioned Knowledge (in general), Memory
and Exclusion), it is because the analysis of the phenomenon of memory
makes immediately and easily evident that the latter presupposes a
knowing subject assumed as identical to the Lord (ĪPVV II: 2, ll. 18-21:
tāvadgrahaṇaṁ jñānāpohanāder api anantaraṁ nirūpayiṣyate svarūpam iti
kramaṁ dyotayati । nanu kuto ’yam evaṁbhūtaḥ kramaḥ । āha suspaṣṭaṁ
kr̥tvā īśvarasvabhāvasya ātmanaḥ siddhau hetutā smr̥ter yato ’sti, tato
’yaṁ kramaḥ).

63 Utpaladeva has in mind the classical definition of memory in YS I.11:
anubhūtaviṣayāsampramoṣaḥ smr̥tiḥ.

64 It is the differentiated content of cognition to project a
corresponding differentiation onto the cognizer and the cognition (p. 5,
ll. 19f.: tataś ca arthoparāgād arthagatau deśakālau pramātāraṁ ca
anubhavaṁ ca āviśantau lakṣyete).

65 That is, as if they were separated from their essential nature as
consciousness.

66 My translation follows Abhinavagupta’s paraphrase (see n 18 to the
edition).

67 According to Abhinavagupta (ibid.: 6, ll. 5f.), this is meant to
exclude the alternative view: the object has the form of the perceiver.

68 That is, in some particular cases used by cultivated persons, but it
is not to be taken as generally valid as this would entail the complete
non-applicability of explicitly stated general rules, like, in this
case, Pāṇini II.2.15 tr̥jakābhyāṁ kartari (p. 6, l. 12 ‘kvacit’
śiṣṭaprayukte । ‘sārvatrika’ iti jñāpake ‘tr̥jakābhyām kartari’ niṣedho
’navakāśaḥ syāt; apparently sārvatrika is a citation from the Vivr̥ti,
but it is not found in the MS). The issue whether a jñāpaka can be
applied to the generality of cases has often been debated among the
grammarians and usually answered in the negative (cf. the well-known
paribhāṣā “jñāpakasiddhaṁ na sarvatra”). See e.g. Puruṣottamadeva’s
explanation in his Laghu-Paribhāṣā-Vr̥tti (p. 160, ll. 8-10), which is
also quite close to the wording of Utpaladeva’s text: jñāpakaṁ hi nāma
na vācakaṁ kiṁ tarhi iṅgitena sūcakaṁ kvacid eva iṣṭasiddhav āśrīyate na
sarvatrety yujyate jñāpakasiddhaṁ na sārvatrikam iti । [. . .] kiṁtu
viśiṣṭa[read: śiṣṭaº?]prayogadarśanāt kvacid eva). In other words, as we
can read in a marginal note found in the ms indicated as Gh in the KSTS
edn. of the ĪPV and included in the n 44 of the same edition (p. 120),
this grammatical “mistake” is not to be imputed to the carelessness of
the author, disregarding the prohibition for compounding a kartr̥- or
karma-ṣaṣṭhī with an agent noun in -tr̥ or -aka stated in Pāṇini II.2.15,
but to his specific intention (yatnataḥ in the Vimarśinī) to point out
one of the cardinal tenets of the Pratyabhijñā (tr̥jakābhyām kartari’ iti
sūtreṇa hi samāsaḥ atra pratiṣiddhaḥ iti parasya pramādakathitam etat
iti vyāmohaṁ nivārayitum āha ‘yatnataḥ’ iti samāsas tv atra
vaktavyavastuśraddhayā kr̥taḥ).

69 In this case the jñāpaka is to be found in the intention of the
sūtrakāra himself, then restated by the vr̥ttikāra, to underline through
the model of what happens in nominal composition (the ekārthībhāva of
its components) the essential non-separateness of the three elements at
issue: artha-anubhava-anubhavitr̥ (cf. ĪPV I: 120, l. 7 to 121, l. 3). In
the synthetic expression of nominal composition (vr̥tti) the meanings of
the single words merge into the overall meaning of the vr̥tti just as
dust mixes with water, so that in the end the water/vr̥tti does not show
any more the “troubling” presence in itself of the dust/single words:
ibid.: 6, ll. 7-9 samāse hi vr̥ttipadārtho vr̥ttyarthe pāṁsur iva udake
miśrībhavan tatkāluṣyarūṣaṇaṁ tatra avabhāsayati (read: nāvabhasayati;
the correct reading is also found in the above-cited n 44 of the KSTS
edn. of the ĪPV I, which is based on the ĪPVV). The above remark, which
might be also taken, as I did, as referring to the close interconnection
of the terms in a samāsa and their merging into the overall meaning of
the synthetic expression (vr̥ttyarthe) is given a much more specific
connotation in Abhinavagupta’s discourse in the ĪPVV: in spite of the
fact that such a compound goes against the grammatical rules, none the
less it is provided with a sort of “correctness” by the urge of the
author to express what he aims to express (p. 6, ll. 6f. ‘tr̥cāpi’ iti
pratiṣiddho ’pi samāso ’tra vaktavyavastuśraddhayā kr̥taḥ). The “force”
of the overall intended meaning of the compound has the capacity to make
the imperfection or unfitness of its single components (tatkāluṣyarū-
ṣaṇaṁ) unnoticeable.

70 The suffix tr̥n produces agent nouns identical to those ending with
tr̥c except for having a verbal regime and shifting the udātta onto the
root; see Lazzeroni 1997. The vigraha form would be: artham anubhávitā.
The possibility for the two words to form a dvitīyāsamāsa is, however,
not allowed, unless (Bhāskarakaṇṭha says in his Vyākhyā I: 149, ll. 2f.)
we resort to the yogavibhāga device and divide Pāṇini II.1.24 dvitīyā
śritātītapatitagatātyastaprāptāpannaiḥ into two parts. According to
Bhāskarakaṇṭha, yatnataḥ in the ĪPV refers precisely to the use of the
yogavibhāga; this interpretation can also be found in a marginal note of
the ms. Gh of the ĪPV, then reproduced in n 43 of the KSTS edn. of the
ĪPV (I: 120). For his part, Utpaladeva refers to vārttika 2 under Pāṇini
II.1.33 (Mahābhāṣya I: 386, l. 13) sādhanaṁ kr̥teti vā
pādahārakādyartham, which, in order to justify compounds like
pādahāraka, states that a factor [whatsoever] can be compounded with a
kr̥danta (we may add: in the absence of a specific Pāṇinian rule to
exclude it). Through Kātyāyana’s more allowing interpretation of
Pāṇinian rules concerning the kr̥danta compounds, also the dvitīyāsamāsa
with a tr̥nnanta as uttarapada comes to be accepted. Interpreting
anubhavitr̥ as a tr̥nnanta instead of a tr̥janta, says Abhinavagupta in the
ĪPVV (p. 6, l. 15), would have a further implication: a restatement of
the fact that the whole discussion on memory presupposes a “māyic”
scenario (tācchīlyādinā hi māyāpadam avadyotitataraṁ syāt; tācchīla,
taddharma and sādhukāri are the three possible meanings of tr̥n according
to Pāṇini III.2.134f.). In conclusion, either as ṣaṣṭhīsamāsa
(incorrect, but allowed due to jñāpaka) or dvitīyāsamāsa (allowed, but
only after applying Kātyāyana’s Vārttika or an ad hoc yogavibhāga
operation), the compounds pūrvānubhūtārthopalabdhr̥- in the Sūtra and
pūrvānubhū- tārthānubhavitr̥- in the Vr̥tti point to a bhedābheda view of
the object, its perception and the perceiving subject. More
analytically, Abhinavagupta says (ĪPV I: 120, l. 6 to 121, l. 3), they
show that perception comes to be (apparently) qualified by time through
its object, i.e. it “rests” on the object, while both the perception and
the object rest on the knowing subject. Grammatically, pūrvānubhūta- in
so far as it is a viśeṣaṇa of -artha rests on it (the past participle
suffix kta gives it a temporal qualification); in their turn, they rest
on the perceiver, who is the central element, the pradhāna as the
uttarapada in the tatpuruṣa compound (Bhāskarī I: 155, ll. 8-10).

71 According to Abhinavagupta (p. 6, l. 19), the reference is to
II.1.4ab 71: kramo bhedāśrayo bhedo ’py ābhāsasadasattvataḥ “Succession
is based on differentiation and this in turn derives from the existence
or non-existence of a certain manifestation” (Torella 2002: 154).

72 According to Abhinavagupta (p. 9, ll. 17f.), the reference is to
II.4.21: itthaṁ tathā ghaṭapaṭādyābhāsajagadātmanā । tiṣṭhāsor evam
icchaiva hetutā kartr̥tā kriyā “Therefore causality, agency, action are
nothing but the will of Him who whishes to appear in the form of the
universe, in the various manifestations of jar, cloth and so on.”
(Torella 2002: 187)

73 In the limited subject (p. 10, l. 1).

74 That is, in terms of separation from the limited subject (p. 10, ll.
5f.: bahir iti tata eva saṁkucitasaṁvidrūpāt vedakāt pr̥thagbhāvena).

75 I take anubhūtabhāva in the sense of [arthasya] anubhūtatva (but the
easier interpretation as anubhūto bhāvaḥ is also possible).

76 The additions between brackets come from the thorough gloss and
elucidation of this very concise passage furnished by Abhinavagupta (p.
10, ll. 1-9: antar iti pratyagātmarūpe
dehaprāṇapuryaṣṭakaśūnyāvacchedini saṁvittattve yaḥ sthitaḥ
pūrvānubhūtaḥ prāktanaprakāśaparāmarśarūpayā idantayā upalakṣito ’rthas
tasya yo vimarśas tamo’pasāraṇena sphuṭīkaraṇam, tatra yā icchā saiva
upakramaḥ prārambho yasyā bahir iti, tata eva saṁkucitasaṁvidrūpāt
vedakāt pr̥thagbhāvena sphuṭavedyatvena yo ’dhunā vimarśaḥ, sa yataḥ
prākkālabhāvinā vimarśena prakhyā[read:
prācyā]nubhavasvabhāvaprakāśajīvitena militaḥ, sa ity evaṁrūpeṇa śabdena
āviṣṭaḥ ubhayakālasparśitāyām api pūrvakālasparśapradhānaḥ prakāśate [.
. .]).

77 Instead of the ghañanta word sampramoṣa, as found in the classical
definition of memory in YS I.11.

78 While the nominal stems are generally considered “established”
(siddha), namely frozen items with respect to verbs, whose core is an
action in progress (sādhya), instead the action nouns belong,
so-to-speak, to an intermediate sphere (cf. Mahābhāṣya ad Pāṇini V.4.19,
vol. II, p. 432, l. 18: kr̥dabhihito bhāvo dravyavad bhavati).
Utpaladeva, and then Abhinavagupta, seem to introduce a further
distinction of their own (or, at least, I have failed to find their
vaiyākaraṇa source): the verbal action expressed by a kr̥danta word may
have a higher “dose” of sādhyatā when expressed by a lyuḍanta with
respect to a ghañanta. To this topic, and more in general to the very
interesting siddha-sādhyatā issue in Indian grammatical thought, I am
devoting a separate study.

79 Abhinavagupta in ĪPVV (p. 10, ll. 19-21) adds that the neuter gender
of a lyuḍanta word is also significant with respect to the masculine
gender of the ghañanta word: the word in the neuter, though possessing
the qualification of being siddha, does not dismiss its also being
sādhya, just like adverbs do.

80 This is an implicit reply to the opponent who might object (p. 11,
ll. 11-14) to the attribution to the Lord of an activity which obviously
points to a state of spatio-temporal limitedness: how could the Lord,
whose knowledge perpetually embraces everything (sarvataḥ prakāśarūpaṁ
sarvārthakroḍīkāri) perceive a particular thing, then keep it in a sort
of dark deposit, then resurrect it?

81 According to Abhinavagupta, in saying puryaṣṭakādiº Utpaladeva means
to totally exclude the śūnyapramātr̥, who is not involved in vyavahāra
activities, like memory (p. 11, ll. 16f. śūnyasyāpi vyavahārātītasya
smartr̥tā na bhāti); the body, though not mentioned directly, is not to
be excluded, due to its close association with the puryaṣṭaka. The
latter also includes prāṇa from which it cannot be separated. The
mention of their autonomy as samāropita means that svātantrya naturally
belongs to the Lord only, and only through him it is, as it were,
extended to other levels of subjectivity; the point is clearly stated in
ĪPK IV.2.

82 In this case, memory as an independent “event” (vastu) would be
simply the effect of the impression left by the former perception,
itself also an independent vastu. This is the Buddhist position, clearly
summarized by Abhinavagupta (p. 11, ll. 23-25: anubhavaḥ saṁskāraḥ
smr̥tir iti tu jñānamālaiva upādānopādeyabhāvena bhaviṣyati).

83 According to Abhinavagupta, this unacceptable (to the Śaivas)
position has been criticized by Utpaladeva in ĪPK 1.3.2. In this Kārikā
it is strongly underlined that a cognition cannot be the object of
another cognition: this applies also to memory. Also the Buddhists agree
on this, but their alternative explanation of memory is far from being
convincing. What the saṁskāra can cause is the mere fact that memory has
a content, but this content cannot be either the original perception nor
the content as having been the object of a former perception (ĪPV I: 97,
ll. 5-8: saṁskārāt paraṁ saviṣayatāmātraṁ smr̥ter siddham, na tu
anubhavaviṣayatvam, nāpi asya viṣayasya pūrvānubhavaviṣayīkr̥tatvam). See
above, n 6.

84 As Abhinavagupta specifies (ĪPVV II: 13, ll. 22-24), here vibhu means
“the One who exists in various modalities” (vividhaṁ kr̥tvā bhavati), and
is not to be taken in the usual sense of “pervader” (vyāpaka) because,
strictly speaking, this would presuppos the existence of spatial
differentiation.

85 That is, the difference between fresh perception and memory. Here
Utpaladeva is apparently replying to the opponent who might say that, if
memory is defined as anubhavāsampramoṣaṇa, it is after all itself a
perception, or, to be more precise, the “coming forth again of that very
perception” (p. 14, l. 22: anubhavasyaiva punarunmeṣaḥ). But, if this is
how things stand, then, when we experience this coming forth again of
the perception, why do we not say in common usage that we are just
“perceiving” (ll. 22f.: tat punarunmeṣe ’pi anubhavāmīty eva na kiṁ
vyavahāraḥ)? Having this possible objection in mind, Utpaladeva proceeds
to clarify what is the specific nature of anubhava (I follow
Abhinavagupta’s understanding of the passage).

86 The fresh perception is felt by the perceiver as the appearance of
something totally new, as a “creation”. But in fact this is not a
creation proper (of something that was not before), since other subjects
have already experienced it previously (p. 15, ll. 15f. nirmāṇatayā
cakāsad api na nirmāṇarūpaḥ pūrvaṁ pramātrantararūpatayā bhāvāt ।
iha[read: iva]śabdo ’nubhavitur abhimāno ’yam iti dyotayati).

87 Generally speaking, this act of ascertainment (niścaya) — or, to use
a broader term, of conceptual elaboration (vikalpa) — operates on the
content of perception, which would be destined by its very nature to
remain in the reign of nirvikalpa, i.e over and above the sphere of
ordinary reality (vyavahāra). To resort to the nice simile of
Abhinavagupta, the vikalpa is just like the doorkeeper of the dancing
hall who helps the poor villager in his desire to come out from this too
lofty place where he has incidentally found himself and come back to the
more modest reality, the world of māyā, where he is accostumed to live
(p. 15, ll. 21-23: tad ayaṁ grāmya iva lāsyamandirāt nirjigamiṣan
dvārapālena vikalpena anugr̥hyate māyāprāṅgaṇe nikṣipatā); likewise, the
vikalpa helps the human subject leave the very “uncomfortable” plane of
pure perception and come back to ordinary life where he could make use
of the wealth (less shining, of course . . .) of nirvikalpa perception.
This mental act will result in the awareness “this”, when it follows
immediately the perception and is closely linked to it; in the awareness
“that”, when it is more or less disconnected from perception (see
below); or else, in a combined awareness (this–that), which
characterizes the act of recognition.

88 Both the general vikalpa and memory take place after some time from
perception and produce the awareness “that”. But there is a significant
difference between them. While the former totally disregards the time of
any original perception (it can even ignore any definite perceptual
content), the latter is characterized by its connecting itself, through
its present reflective awareness, with the reflective awareness which
immediately followed the original perception: the smartr̥ resurrects in
the present the original perception, leaving intact its having occurred
originally in the past. As Abhinavagupta puts it, idānīntanāvabhāsanakā-
laparāmarśo ’pi na nimīlati — iti etatparāmarśabhittiprādhānyena
pūrvakālaparāmarśaḥ iti viruddhapūrvāparaparāmarśasvabhāva eva ‘sa’ iti
parāmarśa ucyate (ĪPV I: 119, ll. 8-12).

89 Cf. ĪPVV II: 17, ll. 11-15: yadi tu sa ity etat svīkr̥tau pūrvau
deśakālau na asya parāmr̥śati, api tu nīlaṁ pītam ity etāvanmātram tat
niścayanasmaraṇapratyabhijñānādiviśeṣavyapadeśanibandhanāyogād
apūrvatānavābhāsāc ca śuddham eva vikalpanam ity ucyate.

90 ĪPK II.3.4, etc.

91 “Internal” in so far as the object is no more in the range of
sensorial perception; “external” in the sense that it appears as
separated from the I (p. 19, ll. 8-10: antar iti indriyabhūmim atikramya
sthito ’pi bahir iti saṁvidbhāgāt vyatiriktatvena ahantāvibhaktena).

92 This obvious remark (obvious in the context of the Pratyabhijñā
philosophy) is the explicitation of arthāt “as a matter of fact” in the
Kārikā (p. 18, l. 14: arthāt sāmarthyāt parāmarśānyathānupapattyā).

93 See below, n 102.

94 Having modified the text of the Vr̥tti with respect to my edition of
it (Torella 2002: 15, l. 9), I have modified my translation accordingly.
See above nn 37 and 38 to the text.

95 My translation agrees only with the latter part of Abhinavagupta’s
explanation (p. 19, ll. 6-8: ‘niyatarūpatayā’ avaśyambhāvenety arthaḥ ।
smr̥tau hi prāgdeśakālayogo ’vaśyam sphurati । anyathā vikalpamātraṁ tat
bhavet, na tu smr̥tiḥ).

96 Cf. p. 19, l. 24 – p. 20, l. 1: sa hi parāmarśaḥ prakāśanasya
svabhāvabhūto dharmaḥ prakāśanābhāve niravalambhana eva kathaṁ syāt.

97 If the entity characterized by a certain essential property is
absent, how can its essential property be present (p. 20, ll. 3f.
svabhāvino hi abhāve asya ayaṁ svabhāva iti katham)?

98 Utpaladeva is here probably reminiscent of the passage of the
Kāśikā-Vr̥tti (vol. III, p. 128, l. 6: nimantraṇaṁ niyogakaraṇam) on
Pāṇini III.3.161: vidhinimantraṇāmantraṇādhīṣṭasampraśnaprārthaneṣu liṅ,
which lists the possible meanings of liṅ. The slightly ambiguous
niyogakaraṇam by which the Kāśikā-Vr̥tti explains nimantraṇa (vol. III,
p. 128) is glossed by the Padamañjarī with niyogato ’vaśyambhāvena yat
karaṇam anuṣṭhānam (cf. Mahābhāṣya on Pāṇini III.3.161, vol. III, p.
327: yan niyogataḥ kartavyaṁ tan nimantraṇam); in sum, nimantraṇam means
“inciting one to do something that has to be obligatorily done, like an
obligatory ritual” (Padamañjarī ibid.: avaśyakartavye śraddhābhojanādau
dauhitrādeḥ pravartaneti yāvat). Abhinavagupta glosses niyogakaraṇa as
follows: (ĪPVV II: 20, ll. 20f.: niyogena niyamena yat karaṇaṁ
sādhyamānatvaṁ, tat lakṣaṇaṁ svarūpaṁ yasya). The possibility that the
remembering subject might not make the former object manifest is to be
excluded; on the contrary, it “does” make it manifest (ĪPV I: 126 ll.
3-6: bhāsayet’ iti vidhirūpeṇa niyogena niyamo lakṣyate, na bhāsayati
ity etat na, api tu bhāsayaty eva iti). The above explicitation given by
Abhinavagupta in the ĪPVV shows incidentally that Utpaladeva, in the
long debated issue of the meaning of liṅ, favours the thesis of the
optative expressing first of all the verbal action denoted by the verbal
root, with an accessory qualification represented by vidhi, etc. (l. 19:
vidhyupādhikadhātvarthasādhyamānatodrecanaṁ liṅartha iti). This
corresponds to the third of the four theses examined by grammarians
(e.g. Padamañjarī, vol. III, p. 129 ayaṁ vidhyādiḥ prakr̥tyarthaḥ,
pratyayārthaḥ, prakr̥tyarthaviśeṣaṇam, pratyayārthaviśeṣaṇaṁ ceti
catvāraḥ pakṣāḥ), who instead generally favour the fourth one; cf.
Sharma 1995: 577f.

99 The possible objection that Abhinavagupta has in mind is made
explicit in ĪPVV II: 21, ll. 17f.: If you say that the object shines in
the memory, it means that there is no difference between memory and
perception (since in both of them the object “shines”).

100 Though in the absolute sense prakāśa has no connection with time,
none the less in the world of māyā it comes to be associated to the past
or the present of the experiencer (in that he identifies himself with
his bodily dimension): the shining of the object in memory is associated
through vimarśa to the shining that occurred in the “past” experiencer.

101 What has been said so far proves to be only an explication and
reformulation of Patañjali’s definition: the “non-extinction” of the
object is reached through the “conservation” of its former perception
within the present reflective awareness (p. 22, l. 24 – p. 23, l. 1:
anubhavo ’tīto hi atra prakāśabhāvena viṣayasya uktaḥ, asampramoṣaś ca
vārtamānikaṁ tathāparāmarśanam).

102 In other words, if the manifestation of the (past) object does not
occur in the present, also the question about the persistence or the
total loss of the object becomes irrelevant, because the “manifestation”
of the object at the actual time of memory is the very pre-condition for
the phenomenon of memory to exist. There is no “loss” for the memory
from the disappearance of the object, just as there is no “gain” if the
object continues to exist (p. 23, ll. 10f.: nāśe arthena smr̥ter na
doṣaḥ, sadbhāve na poṣaḥ iti tātparyaṁ vr̥ttiṭīkayoḥ). This definitely
being what Utpaladeva had in mind, as confirmed now by the Vivr̥ti, my
previous translation of the corresponding Vr̥tti passage (Torella 2002:
105: “Therefore it is not erroneous to state that there is the
manifestation, at the time of the memory, of an object, which, however,
is no longer present at that moment.”) has to be revised accordingly
(see the translation above, p. 427).

103 That is, it would be only a past object, not a past object qualified
by a past experience, actualized at the time of memory (cf. p. 25, ll.
14-16: pūrvasya arthāvabhāsasya anunmeṣe, pūrvaprakāśitvena aparāmarśe,
anubhavena atītena avacchinne [read: anavacchinne] ’rthamātre yo
jñānaviśeṣaḥ, so ’bhinava eva anubhava evety arthaḥ).

104 Abhinavagupta’s comments (p. 23, l. 16 – p. 24, l. 19) give us
useful clues for clarifying this dense passage. A yogin, according to
Utpaladeva, can experience an object belonging to the past independently
from its having actually been the object of a past perception. This is
possible because of the “intermediate” nature of the yogin that has
overcome the stage in which he identified himself with the body but,
being still involved with the mayic world, has not yet reached a full
identification with consciousness and still identifies himself with the
stages between the body and pure consciousness, namely, the puryaṣṭaka,
the prāṇa, the mind or the void. This enables him still to have a notion
of temporal succession: if the latter is full-fledged (ātyantika) only
for the deha-pramātr̥, none the less it affects, more or less dimly, also
the puryaṣṭaka, etc. But, at the same time, the yogin also has a (still
limited and sporadic) access to the identification with the supreme
consciousness, “that immaculate consciousness which, though different
from the presumptive identification with the thickest veil represented
by the body, is however intimately present in all levels of subjectivity
(body, puryaṣṭaka, etc.), just like the autumnal sun obscured by clouds”
(p. 24, ll. 13-15). This immaculate consciousness, once occasionally
freed of the veils dimming it by virtue of the intense application of
the yogin, enables him to have direct access to past events. The
events/objects are perceived as past but not through the intermediation
of a past perception; this can happen because these past but essentially
“new” objects are associated with other past objects which instead are
actually remembered (cf. ll. 17-19: tam [read: taṁ tam] artham
apūrvāvabhāsam eva tata eva smaraṇāyogyam api pūrvasmaryamāṇasāhityāt
pūrvatayā anubhavaty eva). A similar case is the yogin’s cognition of
the past lives.

105 That is, if I understand well, with regard to the object, which,
though not having been previously perceived, is associated with other
objects which have instead been perceived in the past and are now being
remembered.

106 Lit.: “made of previous subjects” (pūrvapramātr̥mayaḥ). It is not
easy to derive the expected meaning from the very laconic transmitted
text (see n 43 to the text). Memory is in fact a combination of a past
object shared by past subjects, a past perception experienced by the
(presently) remembering subject and a present memory act concerning the
synthesis of both. This is what also Abhinavagupta’s comments would
suggest: p. 25, ll. 11f.: smaraṇe tu pūrvapramātr̥̄ṇāṁ yo jñānābhāsas
tasya smartuḥ pūrvānubhavena saha mīlito ’bhūt, sa eva idānīm
evonmiṣatīti viśeṣaḥ.

107 The content of memory is necessarily a svalakṣaṇa in so far as it is
“localized” in a certain time and space. Even if the object of memory is
a single ābhāsa, i.e. a single universal, like “jar” (in general), this
is seen as a svalakṣaṇa in that what would make it a sāmānya proper,
namely its embracing a multiplicity of particulars and its permanence,
are “contracted” by the very fact that it is “remembered” (p. 29, ll.
3-6: atra adhuneti gr̥hīto ya ekaiko ’pi ābhāsaḥ, sa
vyāpakatvanityatvātmasāmānyalakṣaṇatiraskarāt saṁkucitaḥ svalakṣaṇam
ucyate atredaṁ sad iti). This however is not enough to make it sphuṭa in
cases like the one at issue, where the object is a single ābhāsa; its
manifestation lacks “vividness”, Abhinavagupta says, because, due to its
not being combined with other ābhāsas, it does not possess a full
efficiency (p. 26, ll. 7f.: ābhāsāntarasaṁparkavirahāt
pūrṇārthakriyāsampādanavaikalyena). This apparently conflicts with what
Utpaladeva will say some lines later: even a single sāmānya may be
sphuṭa, when it includes a multiplicity of sāmānyas of a progressively
broader extension. But, if I understand correctly, in memory we have a
deliberate act of “isolation” of the single ābhāsa depending on the
subject’s requirements.

108 The novelty of this criterion for establishing the distinction
between sāmānya and svalakṣaṇa (p. 26, l. 14: na anyatra prasiddhaḥ)
requires an adequate explanation by Utpaladeva.

109 The individual ābhāsas do not possess a status of avacchedaka or
avacchedya of their own, but they can assume either according to the
circumstances. They are not associated — Abhinavagupta says (p. 26, ll.
15-18) — remaining on the same plane, like the members of a dvandva
compound, but in a relationship of principal/secondary or
qualifying/qualified. The ābhāsa “cloth”, in a piece of white cloth, may
appear predominant to a subject who, at that particular moment, is
interested in the object as something to cover himself with; on the
contrary, the ābhāsa “white” will appear predominant, if he is thinking
of the capacity the colour white has to confer serenity to the soul (cf.
Pramāṇa-Vārttika I.58 and Svavr̥tti).

110 It is again the YS definition of memory, which had been the starting
point of Utpaladeva’s discussion.

111 The above considerations apply not only to the “dependent” vikalpas,
like ascertainment or memory, but also to those called “autonomous”
(svatantra), like imagination. In this passage Utpaladeva is alluding to
the treatment of bhāvanā/yogipratyakṣa by Dharmakīrti and his followers
(cf. Torella 2012: 479-80).

112 The source of this quotation, according to Abhinavagupta (p. 30, ll.
19f.), are two commentaries on the Śivasūtra, the Madhuvāhinī and the
Tattvārtha-Cintāmaṇi, both ascribed to Bhaṭṭa Kallaṭa and now lost.

113 The visualization of deities is a case of memory-like experience, in
the sense that previous cognitions gained through various means of
knowledge, like revelation or inference, enable the devotee to “see” or
evoke a chosen deity so vividly as to entertain direct relations with
it, such as talking to it. But, as Abhinavagupta clarifies, this is a
“novel” manifestation (ĪPV I: 126: navam eva ābhāsanam), though
depending on previous cognitive experiences.

114 The use of the causative shows that the shining of the object in
memory is not to be viewed as a mechanical or autonomous fact but is to
be inscribed within the wider context represented by the free agency of
an unitary, supreme consciousness. As Abhinavagupta puts it (p. 31, ll.
17-19), it is only to the consciousness-principle, manifesting itself as
the inner self-consciousness of all cognitive acts, that pertains the
power to freely obscure one form and highlight another, to connect them
or separate them. To express this in grammatical terms: the supreme I as
the causal agent (hetu, prayojaka) is the ultimate responsible for the
shining of the object, “causes” it to shine. Due to its complex nature
(in fact, one can induce a certain action in another only on condition
that the induced subject has the intrinsic capacity to perform such
action), the model of the causative form is also applied to account for
the paradoxical status of limited subjects in their delicate balance
between autonomy and heteronomy with respect to supreme consciousness
(Torella 1987: 157f.).

Contributors

Dr Bettina Bäumer, an Indologist from Austria and Professor of Religious
Studies (Visiting Professor at several universities), living and working
in Varanasi since 1967, is the author and editor of a number of books
and over 50 research articles. Her main fields of research are
non-dualistic Kashmir Śaivism, Indian aesthetics, temple architecture
and religious traditions of Odisha, and comparative mysticism. She has
been Coordinator of the Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts,
Varanasi, and Fellow, Indian Institute of Advanced Study, Shimla. She
has translated important Sanskrit texts into German and English [e-mail:
<bettina.baeumer@utpaladeva.in>].

Daniele Cuneo, Faculty of Asian and Middle Eastern Studies, Cambridge,
obtained his PhD in Sanskrit from the University of Rome “La Sapienza”
under the supervision of Prof. Raffaele Torella. After working in Vienna
on the Nyāya Project and in Cambridge on the Sanskrit Manuscripts
Project, Cuneo is currently working in the Leiden University as Lecturer
in Sanskrit and Ancient Cultures of South Asia
(d.cuneo@hum.leidenuniv.nl). His main publications include several
articles on Abhinavagupta’s aesthetic theory, a co-authored Italian
translation of the Mānavadharmaśāstra and more than 500 entries in the
Online Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manuscript Holdings of the Cambridge
University Library (http://cudl.lib.cam.ac.uk/collections/sanskrit)
[e-mail: <dc470@cam.ac.uk>].

Yohei Kawajiri received his PhD from Hiroshima University. He is
research associate in the Humanities Research Institute at Chikushi
Jogakuen University [e-mail:
<ykawa1227@yahoo.co.jp>, <y-kawajiri@chikushi-u.ac.jp>].

Navjivan Rastogi, Formerly Professor & Head, Department of Sanskrit as
well as Hony. Director, Abhinavagupta Institute of Aesthetics & Śaiva
Philosophy, University of Lucknow, he comes in the direct lineage of
K.C. Pandey. His main publications include:  Krama Tantricism of Kashmir
(1979); Introduction to the Tantrāloka: A Study in Structure (1987);
Kaśmīra Śivādvayavāda kī Mūla Avadhāraṇāyeṅ (2002) and Kaśmīra
Śivādvayavāda meṁ Pramāṇa-cintana (2013); an anonymous sub-commentary
of  Īśvarapratyabhijñāvimarśinī  (jointly edited with K.C. Pandey) is
still awaiting publication. He is currently co-editing (with Karl H.
Potter) the EIP (Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies) volume on Kashmir
Śaivism [e-mail: <nr2508@gmail.com>, Website:
http://www.svabhinava.org/abhinava/].

Isabelle Ratié, is Professor of Sanskrit language and literatures,
University “Sorbonne Nouvelle” – Paris 3. Her publications on the
Pratyabhijñā system include various articles in English and a French
monograph (Le Soi et l’Autre. Identité, différence et altérité dans la
philosophie de la Pratyabhijñā, Leiden-Boston: Brill, 2011). She has
also co-authored with Vincent Eltschinger a book on the Buddhist
philosopher Dharmakīrti (Self, No-Self, and Salvation: Dharmakīrti’s
Critique of the Notions of Self and Person, Vienna: VÖAW, 2013) and she
has recently published a study of the criticism of Mīmāṃsā by the
Buddhist philosopher Śāntarakṣita (Une Critique bouddhique du Soi selon
la Mīmāṃsā. Présentation, édi­­­tion critique et traduction de la
Mīmāṃsakaparikalpitātmaparīkṣā de Śāntarakṣita, Vienna: VÖAW, 2014). She
is currently co-editing with Eli Franco a collective volume on the
intellectual history of Medieval Kashmir [e-mail:
<isabelle.ratie@univ-paris3.fr>].

Raffaele Torella is Professor of Sanskrit at University of Rome
“Sapienza”, where he has also taught for long Indian Philosophy and
Religion, and Indology. His main publications are: The
Īśvarapratyabhijñā-kārikā of Utpaladeva’s with the Author’s Vr̥tti.
Critical Edition and Annotated Translation (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass
2002; repr. Delhi 2014); Śivasūtra with Kṣemarāja’s Vimarśinī (Milan:
Adelphi, 2013; in Italian); The Philosophical Traditions of India: An
Appraisal, Varanasi: Indica Books, 2011; with G. Boccali Eros and
Emotions in India and Tibet (Turin: Einaudi, 2007, in Italian) [e-mail:
<raffaele.torella@uniroma1.it>].

Prof. Radhavallabh Tripathi has served as Vice-Chancellor of Rashtriya
Sanskrit Sansthan and retired as Professor from Dr. Harisingh Gour
University, Sagar (M.P., India). He is known for his  contributions to
the study of Nāṭyaśāstra and Sāhityaśāstra. He is also known for his
creative writings and translations in Sanskrit and Hindi [e-mail:
<radhavallabh2002@gmail.com>].

Aleksandra Wenta is currently pursuing a degree in Tibetan and Himalayan
Studies at Wolfson College, University of Oxford, UK She has co-edited
Emotions in Indian Thought-Systems (Routledge; with Purushottama
Bilimoria, 2015) [e-mail: <alexandrawenta@gmail.com>].

Index*

Abhijñāna-Śākuntala, 148n, 149n

Abhinavagupta, 2-3, 8-9, 27, 32, 37, 45-46, 54, 61, 62n, 77, 79, 80n,
82, 83n, 84n, 90n, 92n, 93n, 108n, 110, 114, 116, 119, 136n, 204-06,
210-11, 214-15, 225

as Utpaladeva’s commentator, 4, 102, 104-05, 116, 119, 123, 123n, 127n,
128, 130, 131n, 132-71, 176-88, 191-204, 216-17, 225, 225n

his art theory, 31-32, 34, 37-41, 49-53, 57-58, 59n, 64n, 66, 67, 67n,
68, 111-13, 115, 117

his Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vimarśinī, 3, 15, 78, 225

his Īśvarapratyabhijñā-Vivr̥ti-Vimarśinī, 3, 78, 107, 112n, 225

his Locana, 37, 51n, 62, 67-68, 104, 123-25n, 127n, 189-91

his rejection of sphoṭa, 6n, 63, 63n

his theorization of camatkāra, 10, 33, 103, 133n, 132-71, 176-88

ābhāsa, 174n, 175-76, 176n, 180-82, 182n, 183, 188, 196, 198, 198n,
199n, 200, 201n, 226n, 229n, 239-40, 241n, 242n, 243n, 245n, 247n, 250n,
251n, 252n, 381, 382, 384, 392n, 409, 414, 414n, 415, 417, 435n, 436n

Abhinavabhāratī, 32, 37, 50, 53, 60-63, 67-68, 103, 105, 105n, 117, 205

adhyavasāya, 98n, 99n, 117, 177, 178n, 286, 286n, 288n, 319, 319n, 376,
407

Advaita Vedānta, 1, 2, 63n, 65, 67n, 306n, 344, 345, 348

aesthetics, 10, 31, 36, 38, 38n, 39, 39n, 41, 45-46, 49, 53, 56-57, 59n,
60n, 62, 67-68, 102-217, 350

as a discourse on sense perception, 31, 39, 49, 53

of devotion, 35, 45

aesthetic experience, 33, 37, 50n, 51n, 59, 59n, 64n, 117, 121, 132-33,
138-39, 163, 176-85, 187, 217

aesthetic savouring, 33, 33n, 35, 53, 59n, 106, 108, 113, 122, 132-63,
136, see also camatkāra, carvaṇā

aesthetic susceptibility, see sahr̥dayatā

Āgama, 8-9, 17, 118, 131n, 192, 192n

agency, see kartr̥tā

ālayavijñāna, 234, 237

Alaṁkāraśāstra, 36, 38-40, 50n, 58, 67, 176

āmoda, 132n, 135, 135n, 136, 136n, 137, 137n, 151

Ānandavardhana, 32, 39, 50, 59n, 123n, 124-25, 127n, 190, 360n

āṇavamala, 148

anugraha, 15, 107, 119, 212n, 216, 309, 343, 384, 435n

anupalabdhi, 374-75, 388n, 390n, 392n

anupāya, 15

anusaṁdhāna, 81, 87, 94, 99, 123, 123n, 173n, 175-76, 285, 287n, 288n,
373, 379, 383, 396

anuvyavasāya, 177-78

apoha, 275, 275n, 374-78, 379n, 398n, 399n

arthakriyā, 98, 99n, 127-28, 171n, 173n, 181n, 182n, 183, 223n, 270,
273n, 274, 384, 435n

āsvāda, 23, 33, 36n, 48n, 49, 51n, 59n, 106n, 108n, 112n, 113, 113n,
119, 129n, 135, 135n, 137n, 150, 150n, 154, 158n, 163, 164, 164n, 187,
350

as Parā Vāk, 150

avadhāna, 120n, 131n, 417, 417n

Avantivarman, 47, 125,

Aviddhakarṇa, 260, 261n, 262n

Bhairava Tantras, 2,

bhakti, 14, 16, 20-22, 25-27, 29, 36, 36n, 41n, 49, 108-13, 119n, 135,
137n, 138n, 344-46, 348, 360, 360n

as dāsya-bhakti, 110-13

as love, 21, 23-25, 29, 45

as pūrṇāhaṁtā-camatkāra, 112

as rasa, 25-26, 49n, 113, 344, 346, 348

as śānta-bhakti, 110-13

the two stages of, 110-13

Bhartr̥hari, 6, 6n, 66n, 106, 106n, 161n, 192, 387n, 396n, 409, 410n

Bhāskarakaṇṭha, 174n, 304, 421n

Bhāsarvajña, 263, 292-94, 306

Bhaṭṭa Nārāyaṇa, 15n, 46-47, 110, 143n

bimba, 204n, 234, 248-49, 252, 366

brahmāsvāda, 108n, 177

Buddhist epistemology, 5, 313

Buddhists, 4, 6, 271-72, 272n, 273-75, 306n, 314n, 315, 315n, 316n, 322,
374n, 375-76, 387n, 389n, 399n, 405, 408, 409n, 425n

camatkāra, 10, 26-27, 32n, 33, 33n, 34, 34n, 37, 39, 49n, 59, 59n, 103,
112, 122n, 128n, 132-63, 170n, 171, 181, 187

as akhaṇḍāmarśa,154-55

as rasa-experience, 163-71

its connection with āsvāda, 49, 59, 135, 150, 163-71

its connection with nirvr̥ti, 142n, 143n, 155, 158, 159n

its connection with viśrānti, 32n, 34, 59, 59n, 128n, 148n

camatkr̥ti, 33-35, 36n, 138, 138n, 139, 140n, 153, 153n, 164, 366

carvaṇā, 26-27, 33, 39, 84n, 126, 137n, 138, 142n, 151n, 178n, 186,
186n, 187, 187n, 359-61

causality, 152, 232-33, 270n, 295n, 304, 310n, 315, 423n

citta, 120n, 142n, 164n, 165n, 171, 198n, 378-79, 383-85, 412, 417,
417n, 418

cognition, 9, 33, 41, 51, 60n, 64n, 65n, 106, 126n, 166, 167n, 170n,
173, 176, 198n, 199-200, 230-31, 235n, 241, 244-45, 249, 250n, 296n,
297n, 356, 359, 362, 372-78, 382n, 385-97, 400-01, 405-06, 407n, 408,
419n, 425, 432, 433n, 434, 438, 438n

desire, 31-69, 144n, 146, 148, 171, 230-31, 244n, 252n, 260n, 272n,
285-86, 289n, 294, 303n, 323n, 324n, 325, 330, 365

in the Śivastotrāvalī, 44-45

the maculation of, 148, 187

determinative ascertainment, see adhyavasāya

devotion, see bhakti

Dharmakīrti, 4n, 196n, 198, 230, 230n, 234n, 235n, 236n, 237n, 238,
262n, 266, 266n, 270, 270n, 271n, 274, 296n, 305n, 307, 314, 376, 391,
391n, 398n, 400n

Dharmottara, 4n, 238, 298n, 387n

dhvani, 34, 34n, 49n, 102n, 123n, 125n, 127

Dhvanyāloka, 32, 39n, 50, 60, 67, 68, 104, 342n, 360n

Dignāga, 4n

doubt, 187, 236n, 261n, 270n, 320n, 376-78, 398n, 399n

elimination of delusion (mohāpasāraṇa), 118, 121, 122n, 126, 132

emotions, 20-21, 24, 29, 40n, 51, 52n, 110, 148-49, 165-66, 190n

erroneous superimposition, see samāropa

expansion, see vikāsa

externality, 165-67, 167n, 177, 177n

two types of, 165

freedom, 7, 14, 29, 45, 50, 118, 141, 144, 146, 149, 157, 162, 187, 233,
302, 356, 366, 396, 407, 419, 424-25, 438

doctrine of (svatantryavāda), 2

power of, 2

freedom-from-impurity, 115, 119-20

generality, see sāmānya

ghūrṇana, 136, 136n

grace, see anugraha, prasāda

heart, 24, 29, 122, 122n, 127, 127n, 128n, 130, 171, 301, 35

its connection with reflective awareness, 151-53, 161

see also hr̥dayasaṁgamatva

hr̥dayasaṁgamatva,132-63

icchā, 54n, 106n, 139, 145, 145n, 146, 146n, 147, 147n, 148, 149, 149n,
150n, 164n, 285, 287n, 288n, 302n, 309n, 317n, 322, 323n, 324n, 325,
325n, 327, 365, 423n

imagination, 164n, 173, 175, 177n, 178, 238, 437n

imaginative construction, 179, 189

inference, 194, 230-31, 233, 242n, 244, 248n, 249, 259, 260n, 261, 262n,
263n, 265, 266n, 267, 267n, 268, 269, 271n, 274, 275n, 276-80, 283n,
294n, 298-300, 309-10, 321, 328, 331n, 376, 390n, 391, 392n, 395n, 438n

Sadyojyotis’s inference of īśvara, 312-17

internality, 128n, 163, 166, 167n

intersubjectivity, 232, 245n

invariable concomitance, 230, 231-32, 241n, 244n, 269n, 270, 271n, 274,
278n, 279n, 305n, 314, 390, 393

Jayanta Bhaṭṭa, 263, 274

Jayaratha, 32, 41n, 173, 173n, 175, 352n

jñāna, 55n, 79-82, 87-89, 94-95, 97-98, 122, 132n, 147n, 152n, 195,
196n, 260n, 263n, 293n, 296n, 301n, 378, 378n, 379-83, 385, 387, 389n,
390n, 398n, 400n, 401n, 405n, 410n, 412n, 415n, 418n, 425n, 433n, 434n

Kālīkrama, 352-53, 354n, 355-56, 358, 361-62, 364, 366-67

Kallaṭa, 125n, 134, 438n

kartr̥tā, 146, 152, 152n, 153n, 202n, 269n, 273n, 312n, 379, 412, 423

Kṣemarāja, 15, 19-20, 25, 32, 36n, 41n, 43n, 44n, 45n, 46n, 47n, 48n,
49n, 78, 110, 113n, 137, 137n, 138n, 190n, 203n, 384n, 353, 353n, 358,
360

kriyā, 23, 94-95, 98-99, 120n, 132, 139-41, 144n, 145-47, 147n, 149,
151, 152n, 153n, 160n, 247n, 303-04, 313n, 314n, 319n, 324n, 332n, 412,
423

Kumārila, 13, 66, 165, 309, 316, 325n

his criticism of the proof, 266-76

light of consciousness, see prakāśa

Mahāyāna, 1, 306n

Maheśvarānanda, 353, 363

Mammaṭa, 67n, 112, 121, 193, 304, 345

Māyā, 2, 48n, 65n, 114, 117n, 307, 312n, 326, 326n, 327, 327n, 377, 378,
399n, 407, 423, 427n, 431n

as svatantryaśakti, 2

memory, 377-78, 393, 393n, 394, 396-97, 400, 400n, 401n

mental construct, see vikalpa

mental episode, 142, 148, 161, 163-65, 168-69, 179

mental representation, 167n, 168n, 169, 173

metasentiment (mahārasa), 109, 112

Mīmāṁsā, 5, 8-9, 65, 66n, 265, 267, 270n, 273-74, 296n, 312, 217

mind, see citta

Naiyāyikas as Śaivas, 6, 306-08, 321

Nāṭyaśāstra, 32, 38, 39n, 40, 48n, 49n, 50, 50n, 56, 58, 67, 102n, 103,
164, 205n, 210, 343n

niścaya, 98-99, 122n, 132n, 247n, 407, 409n, 427n

nirvikalpa, 22, 26, 170n, 355, 359, 365, 417n, 418n, 427n

Nyāya, 5, 65n, 258-60, 263, 279, 280n, 289, 294, 294n, 306, 306n,
307-08, 312n, 313, 321-22, 325n, 328

Pāñcarātra, 9

paramādvaita, 2, 14, 16, 23, 25, 29, 58, 60n, 137, 308, 357

paramabhoga, 143, 153-54

particularity, see svalakṣaṇa

Pāśupatas, 326n

perception, 7, 46, 51, 52n, 53, 57, 65n, 110, 112, 116, 122, 125n, 126n,
128n, 130, 147-48, 170n, 175, 177, 243-44, 260n, 271n, 283n, 284n, 286n,
290n, 305n, 314, 314n, 315, 323, 346-48, 357, 362, 367, 389n, 391, 393,
395, 397n, 406, 406n, 407n, 408, 409n, 418-19, 422, 425n, 426, 426n,
427n, 428n, 431n, 433n, 434, 437

immediacy of, 32, 168n, 169, 184, 198, 332, 385, 391-92, 434, 437

sensory perception, 31, 38-40, 49-50, 53, 68, 164-68, 170-71, 286n,
290n, 291n, 332, 355, 358, 366

power of necessity (niyatiśakti), 183, 305, 409

prakāśa, 93, 118-20, 122n, 130, 132n, 141-42, 146-47, 153n, 156-57, 161,
168, 187, 191, 195, 302n, 306, 354, 357, 372, 379, 380, 408, 414n, 425n,
431n

prasāda, 119, 121

prasaṅga-viparyaya, 374

Pratyabhijñā, pratyabhijñā, 1-6, 8, 26-27, 32, 34, 57, 59n, 62, 77, 94,
100, 104-05, 110, 118, 121-22, 123n, 125n, 126, 127n, 128n, 132, 138,
173, 175, 201n, 225, 233, 236n, 258, 288n, 295-96, 298-300, 302, 304,
313, 322, 323n, 328-29, 353-55, 357, 365, 370, 372, 384n, 407

as aesthetics, 113-32

as eradication of delusion, 118, 120, 121n, 122, 132

as firm ascertainment (dr̥ḍhaniścaya), 122n, 132

as full or complete knowledge (parijñāna), 122

as infinitization (aparimitīkaraṇa), 122

as reveling (prakāśana),123, 126, 156

as specific consideration (viśeṣataḥ nirūpaṇa), 123

as the theoretical basis for all Hindu Tantrism, 2

as the ultimate realization, 110

in dialogue with Buddhism, 4-6, 7, 9n

in dialogue with Indian philosophy, 2, 10

in the Sarva-Darśana-Saṁgraha, 4n

prasaṅga, 275n, 278n, 316n, 377, 398n

prasiddhi, 8-9

pratibhā, 8-9, 32n, 34, 37, 49n, 59, 103, 116n, 121, 189-204, 209n

pratibimba, 3, 204, 234, 240n, 249, 250n, 251n, 252n, 204, 366

pratyakṣa, 38n, 91-93, 175n, 177, 177n, 183n, 208n, 227, 240, 244n,
245n, 259n, 263n, 275n, 278n, 298n, 315n, 316n, 332n, 347, 391

Praśastapāda, 258n, 263, 264n, 304n, 325n, 326n, 410

projection, 165, 168-69, 171n, 175, 248, 252n

pūrṇa, 42, 112, 119n, 127n, 129n, 133n, 153, 160n, 171n, 343, 359,
364-66

Ratnakīrti, 236n, 237n

rasa, 32, 33n, 34, 36-37, 39, 44, 49n, 51, 59n, 60n, 61, 64-67, 107,
108n, 109-13, 117, 121, 126, 138-39, 143, 146-48, 163-64, 171n, 176-93,
213, 346, 351, 360-61, 365

as an aesthetic object, 133-34, 142, 154

as pūrṇāhaṁtā-camatkāra, 112

as rasa-niṣpatti,146-47

rasanā, 34, 59n, 126, 142, 142n, 143, 145n, 146, 154, 163, 164n, 176n,
186, 360-61, 367

recognition, see pratyabhijñā,

reflected object, see bimba

reflection, see pratibimba

repose, see viśrānti

Ruyyaka, 172, 172n, 173n, 174, 174n, 347

sādhāraṇīkaraṇa, 51, 126, 148, 188

Sadyojyotis, 312-32

sahr̥daya, 52n, 64, 127n, 133

sahr̥dayatā, 133, 142, 142n, 160, 160n, 161, 161n

Śaiva Siddhānta, 308-22

sāmānya, 64-65, 117n, 125n, 148n, 169n, 180, 181n, 182n, 188n, 263,
264n, 267n, 268n, 270n, 271, 275n, 276n, 278n, 279n, 288n, 289n, 310n,
409-10, 416, 435, 435n

samāropa, 376-77, 398-99, 413

samāveśa, 20, 110, 113n, 360

Sāṁkhya, 5, 63n, 268n, 280-94, 295n, 301, 302n, 317-21

saṁvedana, 212, 127n, 129n, 143n, 151, 160n, 176n, 186n, 187, 196n,
283n, 296, 329, 331n, 332n, 376, 379n, 387, 391n, 401n, 408, 408n, 415n

Śaṅkaranandana, 4n, 294n, 376, 377n, 398n

satkāryavāda, 63, 64n, 292

Sarvadarśanasaṁgraha, 4n

saṅkalpa, 170n, 177, 178n, 323n

santāna, 230, 234n

Sautrāntika, 229-39, 241, 246-48, 251n

savouring, 33, 35, 53, 59n, 106, 108, 113, 122, 132-33, 136, 137n,
138-39, 140n, 141-43, 145-46, 148-50, 153-55, 157, 160-62, 361

self-reflective awareness, see vimarśa

senses, 38n, 40, 41n, 43, 46, 55, 60n, 106, 122, 124, 136, 167, 186,
232, 234, 354-67, 392, 400n

sense-perception, 38-40, 49, 164n, 165-68, 170n, 366

Somānanda, 2-4, 6-7, 20, 32, 35n, 62n, 77, 107, 132n, 139, 143n, 147,
151, 155, 158, 323, 325n, 326-27, 332, 352-53

as inspiration behind Utpala’s camatkāra, 134-36, 159n, 160n, 161-62,
171n

his attack on Bhartr̥hari, 6

Spanda-Kārikā, 3, 20, 106

sphoṭa, 6n, 63, 64n, 66, 66n

sphuṭa, 85-86, 125n, 159n, 169n, 178n, 182n, 193n, 194n, 201n, 226n,
313n, 400, 408, 414n, 416-17, 424n, 435n, 437

sphuṭatva, 408

suggested meaning, see dhvani

svātantryaśakti, 2, 193n

śabdana, 8, 192n

śānta rasa, 59n, 60n, 111-12, 112n

Siddhitrayī, 36, 333

Śivadr̥ṣṭi, 3, 7, 7n, 35n, 60n, 62n, 77n, 96, 98, 352, 352n

Śiva-Stotrāvalī, 7n, 14-16, 19-20, 27, 35, 36n, 41, 42n, 43, 43n, 44,
44n, 49n, 344n, 346n, 348n, 349-50, 350n, 353, 353n

solipsism, 229-30, 238

state of equality (samatā), 19, 20, 21

Sthiramati, 234n, 235n

streams of consciousness, 230, 231, 234, 234n, 235-36, 237n, 241n, 247,
248n, 249n, 250, 252n

svalakṣaṇa, 163, 180-82, 183n, 185-88, 270n, 271n, 272-73, 315, 376,
408-09, 428, 430, 435

Tantrāloka, 8-9, 15, 41n, 61n, 205, 330n

Tantrasāra, 8

Tantric Śaiva sects, 1

Tantrism, 1, 10, 18

Tasting, see rasanā

time, 20, 24-25, 52, 64n, 65n, 182, 188, 190n, 211, 247, 264n, 287,
291n, 306n, 348, 352, 354n, 355, 392-94, 408, 419, 422-23, 426, 428n,
435n, 432, 439

transgressive practices, 1, 57

Trika, 2, 110, 113-14, 134, 189, 192, 308, 322, 352-53

as triad, 26

Twelve Kālīs, 352-67

Uddyotakara, 260, 261n, 262n, 290-91, 291n, 292, 300, 318

ullekha, 103, 165-66, 167n, 169, 172-76

universalization, see sādhāraṇīkaraṇa

universals, 182, 188, 272, 315, 409, 435-36

universality of revelation, 8

Utpaladeva, 2-8, 10, 14-15, 18-23, 25-27, 29, 31-32, 34-46, 47n, 49n,
52-53, 56-57, 62n, 68, 77, 92n, 102-23, 127-29, 131-40, 141n, 143-45,
147-48, 150-58, 159n, 160n, 162-66, 168, 170n, 171n, 172-78, 180-98,
201-10, 212, 214, 216-17, 225-26, 228-29, 232-33, 235, 237-39, 242n,
244n, 251n, 252n, 258-59, 263, 265-67, 268n, 270, 274, 276-77, 279n,
280-81, 284-85, 287, 288n, 289-90, 292, 294-96, 298n, 300-02, 304-08,
312-15, 317, 319, 321-22, 323n, 325n, 326-29, 330n, 332, 344-45, 348,
350, 352-57, 359-60, 362-64, 366, 370-74, 376-78, 404-09

and Bharata, 103, 179-80

and Brahmanical opponents, 2

as a musicologist, 103

as Abhinavagupta’s grand-teacher in dramaturgy, 104

as an authority on musicology, 103, 105, 105n, 204-17

as the teacher of Bhaṭṭendurāja, 104

as the transmitter of the Doctrine of the Twelve Kālīs, 352-53

his ‘drink metaphor’, 49n

his adoption of Bhartr̥hari’s doctrine, 6, 106

his analogy of the pānaka, 172-75

his bhakti, 7, 18-29, 35-3

his bhakti as rasa, 107, 108-13

his borrowings from Jayanta Bhaṭṭa, 263, 274-79, 306n

his concept of camatkāra, 34, 35, 37, 39, 132-72

his concept of grace, 119

his concept of nirmala (vimala) vyavahāra, 113-18, 204

his concept of saṁsāra, 18-19

his connection with the Saiddhāntikas, 321-33

his criticism of the Vijñānavāda, 229-52

his disciples, 15

his discourse on pratibhā, 189-204

his ecstatic aesthetics, 34, 45, 53, 56, 68

his influence on the figure of speech ullekha, 103, 172-76

his linguistic philosophy, 10

his mystical poetry, 18-29

his notion of the heart, 127-32

his objection against Sāṁkhya position, 164, 280-02

his perception of beauty, 35, 39, 41-42, 46, 108-13

his prayatna-viśeṣa doctrine, 177-78

his proof of God (Īśvarasiddhi), 257-33

his rejection of sphoṭa,6n

his usage of alaukika rasa, 37

his Vivr̥ti or Ṭīkā, 4, 225, 228-29, 370-71

in dialogue with the Buddhists, 4-6, 373-76

in dialogue with the Mīmāṁsaka, 265-17

on sense-perception, 43-45, 57, 68

the import of the Vivr̥ti, 4, 225, 228-29, 370-73

the three hymns composed by him, 15

vāc, 61n, 150, 189-90, 195, 205

Vācaspatimiśra, 263-64, 277n, 278-79, 282

Vaiṣṇava, 9, 67n, 109n

Vaiśeṣikas, 263, 301, 302n, 303n, 304n, 324, 326, 326n, 409

vāsanā, 229, 229n, 236, 251-52, 397n, 398n

Vasubandhu, 233-34, 234n, 235n, 247n

Veda, 8-9, 17, 293n

Vijñāna-Bhairava, 20-21, 45, 48, 53, 106, 116, 125n

Vijñānavādin, 229-50

vijñapti, 234n, 247n

vikalpa, 26, 169, 169n, 170n, 188, 198n, 377, 381, 381n, 382, 392n, 394,
394n, 398n, 407, 413, 417, 427n, 428, 435, 437n, 438

vikalpa-saṁskāra, 355

vikāsa, 34, 126, 136n, 158, 159n, 160n, 169, 171n, 172, 188, 200

vimarśa, its connection with freedom, its connection with the heart,
parāmarśa

virodhābhāsa, 343-44

viśrānti, 32, 34, 59, 59n, 128n, 129n, 140, 147, 148n, 235n, 251n, 365,
379, 383, 387

as hr̥daya-viśrānti, 131, 132n, 133

as pramātr̥tā-viśrānti, 142

vyutpatti, 173n, 174n, 241

Voice, see vāc

vyāpti, 135n, 231, 237n, 278n, 361

Yogācāra, 63n, 64n, 65n, 234

[]
