Title: I. Static Aspect
Author: Ñāṇavīra Thera
Source: https://www.nanavira.org/index.php/notes-on-dhamma/fundamental-structure/i-static-aspect
Work: Notes on Dhamma — Fundamental Structure

Full text:

1. Let o represent a thing.

2. If we wish to represent another thing, not o, we must represent it by another symbol; for we cannot distinguish between o and o except by the fact of their being spatially separated, left and right, on this page; and since this is a representation, not of a structure in space (i.e. of a spatial object), but of the structure of space (amongst other things), which structure is not itself spatial, such spatial distinctions in the representation must not be taken into account. Thus, whether we write o once or a hundred times still only one thing is represented.

3. Let us, then, represent a thing other than o by x. (We are concerned to represent only the framework within which things exist, that is to say the possibility of the existence of things; consequently it does not matter whether there are in fact things—it is enough that there could be. But the actual existence of things is indispensable evidence that they can exist; and when there actually is a given thing o, there actually are, also, other things.) We now have two things, o and x.

4. We are, however, still unable to distinguish them; for, since spatial distinctions are to be disregarded, we cannot tell which is the original thing, o or x. Experience shows us that when we are conscious of one thing we are not also equally conscious of another thing; or, better, it can always be observed (by reflexion) that two (different) experiences are not both the centre of consciousness at the same time. The difference between two things is, ultimately, their order of priority—one is 'this' and the other is 'that' —, and this difference we represent by a difference in shape; for if two things are identical in all qualitative respects, have all their properties in common (including position if they are tactile things—and it must be remembered that the eye, since it is muscular, is also an organ of touch, giving perceptions of space and shape as well as of colour and light), no priority is evident, and there are not two things, but only one; and thus difference in priority can be represented by difference of qualitative property. But difference in shape alone only tells us that if one of them is 'this' the other is 'that'—it does not tell us which is 'this'.

5. We have, then, to distinguish between first and second, or one and two. At first sight this seems easy—one is obviously o and two is o x. But since it makes no difference where we write these symbols (spatial distinctions being of no account), we cannot be sure that they will not group themselves o o and x. Since o and o are only one thing, namely o, we are back where we started.

6. To say that o and o are only one thing is to say that there is no difference between them; and to say that o and x are two things is to say that there is a difference between them (no matter which precedes). In other words, two things define a thing, namely the difference between them. And the difference between them, clearly, is what has to be done to pass from one to the other, or the operation of transforming one into the other (that is, of interchanging them). A little thought will show that this operation is invariant during the transformation (a 'journey from A to B'—to give a rough illustration—remains unchanged as a 'journey from A to B' at all stages of the journey), and also that the operation is a thing of a higher or more general order than either of the two things that define it (a 'journey from A to B' is more general than either 'being in A' or 'being in B' since it embraces both: a 'journey from A to B' may be defined as the operation of transforming 'being in A' into 'being in B' and 'not being in B' into 'not being in A'). Each of these two things, furthermore, is itself an operation of the same nature, but of a lower or more particular order (a 'journey from one part of A [or B] to another' is 'being in A [or B]', just as a 'journey from A to B' is 'being in Z', where A and B are adjacent towns and Z is the province containing them). But we must get back to our noughts and crosses.

7. Since o o is one, and o x is two (though the order of precedence between o and x is not determined), it is evident that we can use these two pairs to distinguish between first and second. In whatever way the four symbols, o, o, o, and x, may pair off, the result is the same (and it makes no difference whether o o is regarded as one thing and o x as two things, or, as in the last paragraph, o o is regarded as no operation and o x as one operation—nought precedes one as one precedes two). We have only to write down these four symbols (in any pattern we please) to represent 'two things, o and x, o preceding x'.

8. As these four symbols pair off, we get two distinguishable things, o o and o x (which are 'o first' and 'x second'). These two things themselves define an operation—that of transforming o o into o x and o x into o o. This operation is itself a thing, which we may write, purely for the sake of convenience, thus: [fs1.gif — 4 symbols arranged as 2x2 grid: (o o; o x)].

9. It will readily be seen that if [fs1.gif] is a thing, then another thing, not [fs1.gif], will be represented by [fs2.gif — (o x; o o)]; for if we take [fs1.gif] as 'o precedes x', then we must take [fs2.gif] as 'x precedes o'. But we do not know which comes first, [fs1.gif] or [fs2.gif]. By repetition of the earlier discussion, we see that we must take three of one and one of the other to indicate precedence; and in this way we arrive at a fresh thing (of greater complexity) represented by [fs3.gif — 4x4 grid]. Here it is clear that though in the fourth quarter, [fs2.gif], x precedes o, yet the first quarter, [fs1.gif], precedes the fourth quarter. So in the whole we must say 'o precedes x first, and then x precedes o'.

10. Obviously we can represent the negative of this fresh thing by [fs4.gif], and repeat the whole procedure to arrive at a thing of still greater complexity; and there is no limit to the number of times that we can do this.

11-17. [Remaining sections develop the combinatorial structure: 4 symbols pair off in 3 ways (column interchange, row interchange, both), generating 4-member, 16-member, 64-member representations, etc. The structure is hierarchical and self-similar at each level. Section 15 establishes that the structure of first-order reflexion (16-member) has the same structure as the immediate thing (4-member): "the structure of structure has the structure of structure." Section 16 establishes a hierarchy infinite in both directions (particular and general). Section 17 previews the dynamic aspect: duration, past/present/future as over-determined/determined/under-determined.]
